IMPROVING GENOMIC PREDICTION USING HIGH-DIMENSIONAL
SECONDARY PHENOTYPES: THE GENETIC LATENT FACTOR
APPROACH
KILLIAN A.C. MELSEN 1∗, JONATHAN F. KUNST 1, JOS ´E CROSSA2, MARGARET R. KRAUSE 3,
FRED A. VAN EEUWIJK1, WILLEM KRUIJER 1, AND CAREL F.W. PEETERS 1
Abstract. Decreasing costs and new technologies have led to an increase in the amount of
data available to plant breeding programs. High-throughput phenotyping (HTP) platforms
routinely generate high-dimensional datasets of secondary features that may be used to im-
prove genomic prediction accuracy. However, integration of these data comes with challenges
such as multicollinearity, parameter estimation in p > n settings, and the computational com-
plexity of many standard approaches. Several methods have emerged to analyze such data,
but interpretation of model parameters often remains challenging. We propose genetic latent
factor best linear unbiased prediction (glfBLUP), a prediction pipeline that reduces the di-
mensionality of the original secondary HTP data using generative factor analysis. In short,
glfBLUP uses redundancy filtered and regularized genetic and residual correlation matrices to
fit a maximum likelihood factor model and estimate genetic latent factor scores. These latent
factors are subsequently used in multi-trait genomic prediction. Our approach performs better
than alternatives in extensive simulations and a real-world application, while producing eas-
ily interpretable and biologically relevant parameters. We discuss several possible extensions
and highlight glfBLUP as the basis for a flexible and modular multi-trait genomic prediction
framework.
Key words: Empirical Bayes; Factor analysis; Genomic prediction; High-dimensional data
1. Introduction
Genomic prediction has revolutionized plant breeding programs over the past two decades.
Its use allows maintaining and evaluating breeding populations larger than ever before. As a
result, breeding programs have seen increases in efficiency leading to more rapid development of
varieties that meet today’s challenges [6]. Genomic prediction is a powerful tool in ensuring food
security in the face of a growing population and more extreme climate conditions [14].
The practice of genomic prediction involves training a statistical model using evaluated geno-
types, followed by making trait predictions for untrialed test genotypes [25]. The model is mainly
used in a univariate form (gBLUP, genomic best linear unbiased prediction) where the predic-
tions are sums of genomic marker effects [11]. These predictions allow breeders to make selections
without the need for extensive field trials.
Recent years have seen an increase in the use of high-throughput phenotyping (HTP) tech-
nologies resulting in the characterization of individuals in more aspects than just those of the
genomic and trait phenotypic data. Examples include the collection of hyperspectral reflectivity
measurements on the crop canopy in large field trials, metabolic profiling of plant leaves, and
gene expression profiling using DNA microarrays [e.g., 19]. These secondary phenotypes can be
1Mathematical & Statistical Methods Group (Biometris), W ageningen University & Research, PO
Box 16, 6700 AA, W ageningen, The Netherlands
2Global Wheat Program, International Maize and Wheat Improvement Centre (CIMMYT), Tex-
coco, Mexico
3College of Agricultural Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA
E-mail addresses: ∗killian.melsen@wur.nl.
1
arXiv:2408.09876v2  [stat.ME]  4 Mar 2025
2 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
collected for either the training set alone (termed CV1, cross-validation scenario 1), or both the
training and test individuals (CV2, cross-validation scenario 2) [36]. If of sufficient quality, the
secondary data can contain valuable information that readily improves genomic predictions for
the trait of interest (focal trait). There are several such examples where integration of genomic
and phenomic data leads to higher accuracies [1]
Univariate genomic prediction uses only genomic information and focal trait information to
obtain predictions. To integrate phenomics and genomics, the univariate model can be extended
to a multivariate form relatively easily by modeling the focal trait as well as the secondary
phenotypes as functions of the SNP markers [3]. Direct integration of HTP data to improve
predictions is challenging for several reasons, however. First of all, secondary HTP data are
often high-dimensional complicating parameter estimation. Second, subsets of secondary features
are often highly correlated. This multicollinearity can greatly complicate the interpretation
of model parameters [13]. Finally, even if the number of observations were greater than the
number of features, and features were not highly correlated, direct integration would still be
computationally demanding as the calculation of the BLUPs requires inverting a symmetric
matrix whose dimension equals the number of genotypes times the number of features.
1.1. Current methodology. A number of methods have been developed to deal with the high
dimensionality, multicollinearity, and computational complexity. Lopez-Cruz et al. [22] proposed
linearly combining the secondary features into a single regularized selection index (siBLUP),
thereby reducing the dimensionality to one. The lsBLUP method introduced by Arouisse et al.
[3] is similar in the sense that it reduces the dimensionality to one, but uses a LASSO prediction
of the focal trait using the HTP features instead of a regularized selection index. Another
alternative is MegaLMM as proposed by Runcie et al. [37]. MegaLMM constructs an arbitrary
number of independent factors and unique trait contributions that are linear combinations of
the original features. Neural networks and deep learning have also been investigated as options
for the integration of secondary HTP and genomic data [41]. Due to their flexible nature they
present an attractive option to model complex interactions between many features.
1.2. The proposed model & overview. We introduce glfBLUP (genetic latent factor BLUP)
to deal with the challenges of secondary HTP data. It is based on the idea that HTP features
typically form a set of many noisy measurements of a much lower dimensional set of latent features
[29]. In short, we use factor analysis to reduce the dimensionality of the HTP data to a data-
driven number of uncorrelated latent factors which are subsequently used in multivariate genomic
prediction. We avoid any manual hyperparameter tuning by using a data-driven approach to
determine the dimensionality of the factor model. Our approach is also flexible in the sense
that it can accommodate latent structures of any dimension lower than the Ledermann bound
[21]. This flexibility means that complex structures underlying high-dimensional data can be
accurately modeled. Furthermore, the factor loadings and genetic correlations between factors
and the focal trait are interpretable and reveal the relevant biological patterns in the otherwise
noisy HTP data.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. We elaborate the used notation and
the proposed factor analytic multivariate genomic prediction approach in Section 2. Section 3
provides details and results on a comprehensive simulation study comparing the performances
of different methods as well as the importance of various genetic parameters. In Section 4
we apply glfBLUP and alternatives to a wheat yield and hyperspectral reflectivities dataset
to evaluate their real-world performance and show how glfBLUP produces biologically relevant
and interpretable parameters. Finally, we discuss several possible extensions to the proposed
approach in Section 5.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 3
2. Model
2.1. Notation. We denote matrices and vectors by boldface upper- and lower-case symbols,
and scalars by lower-case symbols. Furthermore, we use Σ and R to denote covariance and
correlation matrices. We additionally use the superscripts p, g, and ϵ to denote phenotypic,
genetic, and residual covariance and correlation matrices. For example, the symbol Σϵ denotes
the residual covariance matrix.
Let A∈ Rn×(p+1) be some data matrix containingp secondary features and a single focal trait
forn individuals. While we thus use p for the number of secondary features as well as phenotypic
covariance matrices, its meaning should be clear from the context. We assume that genotypes are
replicated r times following a balanced design so that the total number of individuals n =ngr,
whereng andr represent the number of genotypes and number of replicates per genotype. Note
that we assume a balanced design for notational simplicity, but that it is not a requirement.
We use two indices to specify the rows of data matrices so that a(i|j) represents the 1× (p + 1)
data vector for replicate i given genotype j. We use the subscripts s and f to denote a matrix
containing only secondary features or a vector containing only the focal trait. As an example,
As is a data matrix containing secondary features, and as(i|j) is the row vector of secondary
features for genotype j, replicate i. The kinship matrix is denoted by K.
We use◦ and⊗ to denote the Hadamard and Kronecker products. We usediag(s11,...,s pp) to
refer to a p-dimensional diagonal matrix with elements s11,...,s pp. We denote the column-wise
vectorization of a matrix by vec(A) and use vec−1(A) for the reverse operation. The cardinality
of a set A is denoted by card(A). Some further information and examples on the partitioning
of data and covariance matrices, as well as some general background information on genomic
prediction, can be found in SM Section 1.
2.2. Modeling of secondary features. The pipeline we propose uses a fully unsupervised di-
mensionality reduction before including factor scores as additional traits in multi-variate genomic
prediction. This section contains details on the steps involved in the dimensionality reduction.
Section 2.3 then provides some details on the multivariate genomic prediction.
2.2.1. Model and assumptions. Consider the secondary feature phenotypic data matrix Ys ∈
Rn×p. We assume a balanced design for simplicity, but note that this is not required. In a
balanced design n = ngr, i.e., the number of observations is equal to the number of genotypes
multiplied by the number of replicates per genotype. Assuming no covariates, all secondary
phenotypes are composed of genetic and residual components:
Ys = Gs + Es.
We assume that the genetic components are independent of the residual components so that
vec(Ys) = vec(Gs) + vec(Es)∼N np(0, Σg
ss⊗ ZKZ⊤ + Σϵ
ss⊗ In),
where ZKZ⊤ and In are the row covariances of Gs and Es, respectively. The n×ng incidence
matrix Z links individuals to genotypes. Similarly, Σg
ss and Σϵ
ss are the column covariances of
Gs and Es. We use the subscript ss to denote that Σg
ss and Σϵ
ss contain genetic and residual
covariances among secondary features.
While we require plot-level data to estimate covariance matrices, two-stage genomic prediction
typically uses best linear unbiased estimates (BLUEs). For a completely randomized design we
can obtain these BLUEs for a single genotype j by simply taking the genotypic mean of all
replicates i = 1,...,r [20]:
(1) ¯ys(j) = gs(j) + ¯ϵs(j) = gs(j) + 1
r
rX
i=1
ϵs(i|j).
4 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Note that as the residual vectors ϵs(i|j) of the replicates of genotype j are iid random vectors,
basic covariance algebra shows that the covariance of¯ϵs(j) is simplyr−1Σϵ
ss [20] (see also Supple-
mentary Material (SM) Section 2). As a result, ¯ys(j)∼N p(0, Σp
ss), where Σp
ss = Σg
ss +r−1Σϵ
ss,
assuming for a moment that K◦ Ing = Ing.
In glfBLUP, we use a factor analytic structure for Σg
ss. This follows from the assumption that
the genetic components gs(j) can be written as a weighted sum of m latent factors and p factor
model errors:
(2) g⊤
s(j) = Λξj +εj,
where Λ is ap×m matrix containing factor loadings,ξj is anm× 1 vector containing the latent
factor scores for genotype j, and εj contains the factor model errors. Substituting (2) into (1)
gives us the full model for the secondary phenotypic data:
(3) ¯y⊤
s(j) = Λξj +εj + ¯ϵ⊤
s(j).
We now make the following assumptions: (i) rank( Λ) = m<p , (ii) εj∼N p(0, Ψ), where Ψ =
E(εjε⊤
j ) and Ψ≡diag(ψ11,...,ψ pp) withψqq > 0,∀qq, (iii)ξj∼N m(0, Im), (iv)ξj /upmodelsεj′,∀j,j′,
(v)ξj /upmodels¯ϵs(j′),∀j,j′, and (vi) εj /upmodels¯ϵs(j′),∀j,j′.
These assumptions imply that the genetic covariance matrix Σg
ss equals the model-implied
genetic covariance matrix Σg
ss(Θ) = ΛΛ⊤ + Ψ = E

(Λξj +εj)(Λξj +εj)⊤
where Θ =
{m, Λ, Ψ}. Therefore, ¯ys(j)∼N p(0, ΛΛ⊤ + Ψ +r−1Σϵ
ss). The covariance of the genetic com-
ponents gs(j) can thus be decomposed into common ( ΛΛ⊤) and unique ( Ψ) elements.
We will use the model above to project the observed secondary features onto a lower-
dimensional latent space in six steps.We first use the plot-level data to obtain estimates for
the genetic and residual correlation matrices of the observed secondary features (I). We then re-
dundancy filter the secondary data (II) to ensure there are no pairs of features with near perfect
genetic correlations, followed by regularization of the filtered genetic and residual correlation
matrices (III). We then estimate the latent dimension (IV) and fit the factor model (V). Next,
we obtain estimates for the latent factor scores (VI), completing the dimension reduction. The
remainder of this section is devoted to the details of these six steps.
2.2.2. Covariance matrix estimation (step I). The factor analytic approach in glfBLUP largely
revolves around the genetic and residual covariance matrices of the observed secondary data.
We can obtain estimates of these matrices by using REML (restricted maximum likelihood) and
the kinship matrix K for a small number of features. When the number of secondary features
p exceeds 5-10, however, the computational complexity quickly becomes prohibitive and REML
estimates can no longer be obtained [46]. As this is usually the case for high-dimensional HTP
data, we use data containing genotypic replicates and correct for experimental design factors
and spatial trends to obtain pseudo-CRD (pseudo completely randomized design) data as a pre-
processing step. Note again that in this case, assuming balanced data, the total number of
records is simply the number of genotypes times the number of replicates, i.e., n =ngr. We then
assume that ZKZ⊤ = ZZ⊤, i.e., K = Ing, and obtain estimates for Σg
ss and Σϵ
ss using sums of
squares as measures for between and within-genotype variation [30]:
MSg
ss = ( ¯Yg
s− ¯Ys)⊤( ¯Yg
s− ¯Ys)(ng− 1)−1
MSϵ
ss = ( ¯Yg
s− Ys)⊤( ¯Yg
s− Ys)(n−ng)−1
ˆΣg
ss = (MSg
ss− MSϵ
ss)r−1
ˆΣϵ
ss = MSϵ
ss,
(4)
where Ys is then×p data matrix containing the secondary features. Overall means and genotypic
means are located in ¯Ys and ¯Yg
s, respectively. A well-known issue with the estimation of such
covariance matrices using multivariate sums of squares is the fact that sufficient within-genotype
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 5
variation can result in ˆΣg
ss having negative eigenvalues [26] as it is not a moment matrix but
rather the difference of two moment matrices (as opposed to ˆΣϵ
ss which is a moment matrix and
therefore at worst positive-semidefinite if p>n ). We deal with this issue by simply finding the
nearest positive-definite matrix using Higham’s algorithm [15]. From here on, ˆΣg
ss refers to this
nearest positive definite matrix.
We scale the covariance matrices as our approach requires them to be on the correlation scale
for regularization:
ˆRg
ss = ( ˆΣg
ss◦ Ip)−1/2 ˆΣg
ss( ˆΣg
ss◦ Ip)−1/2
ˆRϵ
ss = ( ˆΣϵ
ss◦ Ip)−1/2 ˆΣϵ
ss( ˆΣϵ
ss◦ Ip)−1/2.
We emphasize that the assumption of independent genetic effects is only made for the genetic
and residual covariance estimators in equation (4). We use a marker-based kinship matrix in
the final genomic prediction step. The assumption of diagonal kinship ( K = Ing) in (4) simply
means that the subsequent factor analysis is based on the covariance between the total (rather
than only the additive) genetic effects.
2.2.3. Redundancy filtering (step II). Given the fact that multicollinearity is common in HTP
data, some of the p secondary features will likely show near perfect genetic correlation and are
therefore redundant. We filter the genetic correlation matrix using the algorithm described by
Peeters et al. [33] with an absolute genetic correlation threshold τ (i.e., after filtering, no two
features will have an absolute genetic correlation|ρg| equal to, or exceedingτ). This filtering step
produces ˆRg∗
ss∈ Rp∗×p∗
containing only the p∗ secondary features that pass filtering ( p∗≤ p).
We subset the residual correlation matrix and data matrix so they too only contain the remaining
p∗ features.
2.2.4. Regularization (step III). The filtered estimates ˆRg∗
ss and ˆRϵ∗
ss may still be ill-conditioned
or singular which is why regularization is required. To achieve this, we use penalized maximum
likelihood forms in the remainder of the glfBLUP method [33, 43]:
ˆRg∗
ss(ϑg) = (1−ϑg) ˆRg∗
ss +ϑgIp∗
ˆRϵ∗
ss(ϑϵ) = (1−ϑϵ) ˆRϵ∗
ss +ϑϵIp∗,
(5)
where ϑg,ϑϵ∈ (0, 1]. We find the optimal values for the penalty parameters ϑ‡
g and ϑ‡
ϵ through
K-fold cross-validation where we split the data by dividing the ng genotypes over K disjoint
folds and minimize the following expression using Brent’s algorithm [5]:
(6) φK(ϑ) := 1
K
KX
k=1
wk

ln


R∗
ss(ϑ)

¬k
 + tr

R∗
ss

k

R∗
ss(ϑ)
−1
¬k

,
where (R∗
ss(ϑ))¬k is the penalized genetic or residual correlation matrix given the corresponding
penalty ϑ estimated using the K− 1 folds. The non-penalized correlation matrix ( R∗
ss)k is
estimated using the left-out fold. Each left-out fold is weighed by wk, which is equal to the
number of genotypes or individuals in that fold for the genetic and residual correlation matrix,
respectively. See Peeters et al. [33] for further details. We use an efficient implementation
to minimize (6) which results in iterations of complexity O(p∗) as opposed to O(p∗3) due to
the repeated inversion of R∗
ss(ϑ)¬k required in the naive minimization. This leads to faster
optimization, especially if optimal penalty values are close to the bounds. Details regarding our
implementation can be found in SM Section 3. Note that both ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g) and ˆRϵ∗
ss(ϑ‡
ϵ) balance the
unbiased but high-variance estimated correlation matrices with the biased but stable identity
matrix, optimizing the bias-variance trade-off. While our approach uses the identity matrix,
we may use another target matrix T in (5) instead if prior information is available in the form
6 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
of, for example, covariance estimates from earlier trials. The only requirement is that T is a
positive-definite correlation matrix.
2.2.5. Latent dimension (step IV). In principle, the model specified in (3) is valid for any latent
dimension m≤ 1
2

2p + 1− (8p + 1)1/2
[21]. We must specify an estimate for m prior to fitting
the factor model and obtaining an estimate for the other parameters in Θ, however. To do so
we use a lower eigenvalue bound based on the Marchenko-Pastur distribution [24]:
ω+ =
 
1 +
s
p∗
ng
!2
,
whereng is the number of genotypes used to estimate the genetic covariance matrix as described
in Section 2.2.2. We then determine ˜m:
˜m := card
n
d
h
ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g)
i
>ω +
o
,
where d[ ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g)] are the eigenvalues of ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g). Consequently, the latent dimension we use is
simply the number of eigenvalues of the regularized correlation-scale estimate for Σg∗
ss, ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g),
that exceed ω+.
2.2.6. Factor analytic modeling (step V). With regularized estimates for the correlation matrices
and latent dimension available, we now proceed with the factor analytic dimension reduction
of the redundancy filtered secondary data. In the context of plant breeding, we are mainly
interested in genetic correlations and will therefore fit the factor model using a reduced form
of the secondary data covariance matrix. Recall that the full covariance of the BLUEs given in
Section 2.2.1 was Σp∗
ss = Σg∗
ss +r−1Σϵ∗
ss, with stars added to denote the redundancy filtering. The
reduced covariance that we use to fit the factor model is thus Σp∗
ss−r−1Σϵ∗
ss = Σg∗
ss = ΛΛ⊤ + Ψ.
Given the fact that maximum-likelihood estimation of Θ is scale-free [32], we opt to estimate the
loadings and uniquenesses using correlation rather than covariance matrices. We denote these
correlation-scale parameters by ΘR ={m, ΛR, ΨR}. Furthermore, we recognize that the sample
genetic correlation matrix ˆRg∗
ss is a sufficient statistic for the population correlation matrix Rg∗
ss,
meaning the maximum likelihood estimate ˆΘR, given a latent dimension ˜m, can be found by
minimizing the following discrepancy function [17]:
(7) F
h
Rg∗
ss(ΘR); ˆRg∗
ss; ˜m
i
= ln
Rg∗
ss(ΘR)
 + tr
h
ˆRg∗
ssRg∗
ss(ΘR)−1
i
− ln
 ˆRg∗
ss
−p∗,
where we constrain Λ⊤
RΨ−1
R ΛR to be a diagonal matrix with ordered diagonal elements for
identification. We replace ˆRg∗
ss by the regularized estimate ˆRg∗
ss(ϑ‡
g) as minimizing (7) requires a
positive-definite and ideally well-conditioned sample genetic correlation matrix [33]. We employ a
Varimax rotation once we have obtained the estimates forΛR and ΨR to facilitate interpretability
[18]. In essence, the varimax rotation attempts to bring the loadings matrix close to having simple
structure, i.e., a structure in which variables load highly on a single factor and have near zero
loadings on the other factors. To avoid notational clutter we simply use ˆΛR to refer to either the
rotated or non-rotated estimated loadings. The described factor analytic model is implemented
using an efficient matrix-free estimation method [10].
2.2.7. Estimation of factor scores (step VI). We would now like to obtain estimates for the
factor scores ξj. These factor scores are essentially estimates of the locations of genotypes in
latent space, based on the many noisy but observable secondary feature measurements. They
can thus be viewed as the unobserved phenotypes of a small number of latent traits that generate
the observed phenotypes for the many secondary features. We will use the joint distribution of
the secondary feature BLUEs and latent factors (9) in a slightly modified Thomson regression
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 7
approach [40] to obtain ˆξj. Recalling that we estimated ΘR on the correlation scale, we first
convert ˆΛR and ˆΨR back to the covariance scale:
ˆΛ = D ˆΛR and ˆΨ = D ˆΨRD, where D = ( ˆΣg∗
ss◦ Ip∗)1/2.
We also scale back the regularized residual correlation matrix obtained using (4) and (5):
(8) ˆΣϵ
ss(ϑ‡
ϵ) = ( ˆΣϵ∗
ss◦ Ip∗)1/2 ˆRϵ∗
ss(ϑ‡
ϵ)( ˆΣϵ∗
ss◦ Ip∗)1/2.
We can now obtain the matrix P mapping the redundancy filtered secondary features to their
projections on the lower-dimensional latent space through E(ξj|¯y∗
s(j)). To obtain this expecta-
tion, we first use standard covariance algebra to obtain the joint distribution of the secondary
feature BLUEs and latent factors as
(9)
¯y⊤
s(j)
ξj

∼N p+m
h
0, Σ(Θ)y
ξ
i
,
where
Σ(Θ)y
ξ =
Σ(Θ)yy Σ(Θ)yξ
Σ(Θ)ξy Σ(Θ)ξξ

=
ΛΛ⊤ + Ψ +r−1Σϵ
ss Λ
Λ⊤ Im

=
Σg
ss +r−1Σϵ
ss Λ
Λ⊤ Im

.
Given that the joint distribution (9) is normal, we can obtain the conditional expectation as
Σ(Θ)ξy [Σ(Θ)yy]−1 ¯y∗
s(j) [2]. Using the Woodbury matrix identity [44], we rewrite this last
expression to produce:
˜ξj =
h
I ˜m + ˆΛ⊤( ˆΨ +r−1 ˆΣϵ∗
ss)−1 ˆΛ
i−1
ˆΛ⊤( ˆΨ +r−1 ˆΣϵ∗
ss)−1¯y∗⊤
s(j)
= P⊤¯y∗⊤
s(j).
Replacing ˆΣϵ∗
ss by the regularized estimate obtained using (4), (5), and (8) gives us the final
expression for the estimation of the factor scores for all genotypes:
˜Ξ = ¯Y∗
s
h
ˆΨ +r−1 ˆΣϵ∗
ss(ϑ‡
ϵ)
i−1
ˆΛ

I ˜m + ˆΛ⊤
h
ˆΨ +r−1 ˆΣϵ∗
ss(ϑ‡
ϵ)
i−1
ˆΛ
−1
= ¯Y∗
sP.
(10)
Through this projection we thus obtain factor scores that are essentially posterior estimates of
latent phenotypes given the observed data. Instead of a full Bayesian approach we use empirical
Bayes by using the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters associated with the factor
model in (10). Furthermore, note that var( ¯y∗
s(j))→ Σg∗
ss as r→∞ , and as a result the projec-
tion P approaches the matrix that would be obtained using the ordinary Thomson regression
approach. We thus account for the extra uncertainty due to a limited number of genotypic
replicates.
In (10) we apply the projection to the BLUEs (that is, the genotypic means). In practice we
project the plot-level data, however, to obtain plot level factor scores ˜Ξ∈ Rn× ˜m. We later use
these plot-level factor scores and sums of squares to obtain estimates for the genetic and residual
covariances of the latent factors and focal trait.
One of the characteristics of Thomson regression that we maintain in our modified approach
is the orthogonality of the factor scores. We have thus reduced the possibly high-dimensional
and collinear secondary data to a much smaller set of orthogonal factors, without losing in-
terpretability. These orthogonal factors can easily and effectively be used in any multivariate
genomic prediction approach. We use the next section to describe the multivariate genomic pre-
diction step using the factor scores, target trait, and marker-based kinship matrix, thus finally
integrating genomic and secondary feature data.
8 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
2.3. Modeling of latent factors and focal trait. Having reduced the dimensionality of the
secondary data we now proceed with the multivariate genomic prediction. The remainder of this
section contains a description of the model and assumptions, estimation of covariance matrices,
selection of relevant factors, and calculations resulting in the final focal trait predictions.
2.3.1. Model and assumptions. Consider the data matrix Y˜Ξf∈ Rn×( ˜m+1) containing the latent
factor scores and focal trait. The matrix Y˜Ξf can be partitioned:
(11) Y˜Ξf =
Y˜Ξ yf

,
where the matrix Y˜Ξ is the n× ˜m matrix containing the plot-level factor scores and yf is the
n×1 column vector containing the focal trait. Like for the secondary features, these factor scores
and focal trait are composed of genetic and residual components:
Y˜Ξf = G˜Ξf + E˜Ξf.
We again assume that the genetic components are independent of the residual components so
that
vec(Y˜Ξf) = vec(G˜Ξf) + vec(E˜Ξf)∼N np(0, Σg⊗ ZKZ⊤ + Σϵ⊗ In),
where ZKZ⊤ and In are the row covariances of G˜Ξf and E˜Ξf, respectively. The n×ng incidence
matrix Z links individuals to genotypes. Similarly, Σg and Σϵ are the column covariances of
G˜Ξf and E˜Ξf. These covariance matrices can be block-partitioned:
Σg =
 
Σg
˜Ξ˜Ξ σg
˜Ξf
σg
f ˜Ξ σg
ff
!
=
Σg
˜Ξ.
σg
f.

Σϵ =
 
Σϵ
˜Ξ˜Ξ σϵ
˜Ξf
σϵ
f ˜Ξ σϵ
ff
!
=
Σϵ
˜Ξ.
σϵ
f.

,
where Σg
˜Ξ˜Ξ and Σϵ
˜Ξ˜Ξ contain the genetic and residual covariances among the latent factors
present in the sample, σg
ff and σϵ
ff are the scalar focal trait genetic and residual variances, and
σg
˜Ξf = (σg
f s)⊤ and σϵ
sf = (σϵ
f s)⊤ contain the genetic and residual covariances between latent
factors and the focal trait. We estimate the above covariance matrices using the plot-level data
as described in Section 2.2.2.
2.3.2. Factor selection and multivariate genomic prediction. We now convert the plot-level data
to BLUEs ¯Y˜Ξf by taking the genotypic means. Note that we have not used the focal trait data
yf in the modeling of the secondary features. As a result, not all of the ˜m factors may be relevant
to the multivariate genomic prediction problem. As a basic form of subset selection we perform
an exhaustive search for the best subset of ˜m⋆≤ ˜m factors for predicting the focal trait BLUEs
¯yf using the factor score BLUEs ¯Y˜Ξ in multiple linear regression, using adjusted R2 as the
accuracy measure [23]. Following this search, we subset the BLUEs to obtain ¯Y˜Ξ⋆f∈ Rn×( ˜m⋆+1)
and subset the estimated covariance matrices of factor scores and focal trait accordingly:
ˆΣg⋆ =
 ˆΣg
˜Ξ⋆ ˜Ξ⋆ ˆσg
˜Ξ⋆f
ˆσg
f ˜Ξ⋆ ˆσg
ff
!
ˆΣϵ⋆ =
 ˆΣϵ
˜Ξ⋆ ˜Ξ⋆ ˆσϵ
˜Ξ⋆f
ˆσϵ
f ˜Ξ⋆ ˆσϵ
ff
!
.
We finally divide ˆΣϵ⋆ by the number of replicates and combine secondary and genomic data
using the standard multivariate BLUP equations (see SM Section 1 and, e.g., [36, 3]).
The integration of secondary and genomic data thus follows from the use of the marker-based
kinship matrix and the inclusion of the factor scores as additional traits in the multivariate
genomic prediction. If secondary data are only available for the training set (CV1), the extra
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 9
features refine estimates of genetic (i.e., marker) effects for training genotypes. These improved
training set estimates are then translated to test set estimates. In CV2, where secondary data
are available for the test set too, the extra features provide direct information on the genetic
effects for the test set, improving estimates of the focal trait directly. To evaluate the BLUP
equations described in SM Section 1 we use a fast algorithm that decreases the complexity of
these calculations from O(n3
g( ˜m + 1)3) to O(ng( ˜m + 1)2 + ( ˜m + 1)3) [9].
On a final note, consider that as the dimensionality reduction described in Section 2.2 is
entirely unsupervised, glfBLUP is flexible with regards to what secondary feature data are used.
If secondary features are only available for the training set (CV1), estimation of the covariance
matrices, redundancy filtering, regularization, estimation of Θ, etc. is based only on training data
and factor scores are only obtained for the training set. In CV2, where secondary features are
also available for the test set, these data can be included effortlessly as well using the multivariate
BLUP equations found in SM Section 1.
3. Simulations
We compared glfBLUP to a number of alternative approaches in terms of performance in
different high-dimensional data settings. We compared glfBLUP to siBLUP, lsBLUP, MegaLMM,
deep learning (multiMLP: multivariate multilayer perceptron), and the univariate gBLUP model,
see SM Section 4 for details on these methods. The following two subsections provide details on
the simulation process as well as the results.
3.1. Setup. We simulated a range of different high-dimensional datasets to evaluate model per-
formance under varying circumstances (Figure 1). We used ng = 500 randomly selected geno-
types (1500 SNP markers) from the RegMap Arabidopsis thaliana panel [16] to construct a
kinship matrix and simulated r = 2 replicates for a total number of n =ngr = 1000 individuals.
Consider the model for the observed secondary features and focal trait:
(12) Y = Z
 
ΞΛ⊤ + Γ

Sg
+ ESϵ,
where Y ∈ Rn×(p+1) is the data matrix, Ξ is the ng×m matrix of factor scores, Λ is the
(p + 1)×m matrix of loadings, Γ∈ Rng×(p+1) is the matrix containing factor model errors, and
E is the n× (p + 1) matrix containing correlation scale residuals. The n×ng design matrix Z
links records to genotypes. The matrices Sg and Sϵ are diagonal matrices containing the genetic
and residual standard deviations of the secondary features and focal trait. The correlation scale
genetic components of the phenotypes are thus defined as G = ΞΛ⊤ + Γ.
To simulate the data we first randomly sampled m = 8 factor scores for each genotype from a
multivariate normal distribution taking relationships between genotypes as defined in the kinship
into account:
(13) vec( Ξ)∼N ngm (0, Φ⊗ K) ,
where Φ = Im, thus assuming that factors are independent. Next we sampled the factor model
errors:
(14) vec( Γ)∼N ngp (0, Ψ⊗ K) ,
where Ψ≡ diag(ψ1,...,ψ p+1) is a diagonal matrix with unique variances. The first p = 800
unique variances corresponding to the secondary features are sampled from a uniform distribu-
tion: ψq∼U

1− (0.3)2, 1− (0.8)2
, ensuring that the loadings for these features are between
0.3 and 0.8 given that features load on a single factor as described next. The last unique variance
corresponding to the focal trait is one of the parameters we varied so that ψp+1∈{ 0.8, 0.5, 0.2}.
We constructed the loadings matrix Λ∈ R(p+1)×m so that eight blocks of 100 secondary
features (s1,...,s p) load on m = 8 genetic latent factors with a single feature loading on a
single factor. Part of the focal trait ( y) phenotype is generated by ms = 4 latent signal factors
(LSF ) through loadings. The focal trait does not load on the remaining mn = 4 factors (latent
10 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
noise factors, LNF ), meaning that the 400 secondary features generated by the LNFs are not
genetically correlated to the focal trait. The loading for each of the secondary features sq was
obtained as
p
1−ψq and given a random sign ensuring that the genetic component of each
secondary feature is simulated on the correlation scale. The loadings of the focal trait on the
ms = 4 latent signal factors were obtained as
p
(1−ψp+1)/ms. The focal trait thus loads equally
on all four latent signal factors.
The genetic components and corresponding correlation matrix can now be obtained as G =
ΞΛ⊤ + Γ and Rg = ΛΦΛ⊤ + Ψ. The non-genetic or residual components are sampled from a
multivariate normal distribution:
(15) vec( E)∼N np (0, Rϵ⊗ In) ,
where Rϵ is a correlation matrix containing random residual correlations (mean of 0 and standard
deviation of approximately 0 .05) among the 800 observed features and between those features
and the focal trait. Whe then finally obtain the phenotypic data:
(16) Y = Z (GSg) + ESϵ,
where the genetic and residual standard deviations in Sg and Sϵ are obtained through the her-
itabilities of the secondary features and focal trait. Using the secondary feature heritabilities
h2(s)∈{ 0.5, 0.7, 0.9} we obtain the genetic and residual standard deviations as σg(s) =
p
h2(s)
andσϵ(s) =
p
1−h2(s), given that we restrict σ2
g(s) +σ2
ϵ (s) to be 1. We use the focal trait her-
itabilities h2(y)∈{ 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9} to similarly obtain the standard deviations for the focal
trait. These heritabilities together with the focal trait unique variance are the three parameters
we vary. Figure 1 provides a graphical overview of the simulation setting.
We generated 100 datasets for each of the 45 combinations obtained by varying the
secondary feature heritabilities h2(s) ∈ {0.5, 0.7, 0.9}, focal trait heritabilities h2(y) ∈
{0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}, and focal trait unique variances ψp+1∈{ 0.8, 0.5, 0.2}. These combi-
nations represent a realistic spectrum of data settings ranging from settings where the quality
of secondary features is high while focal trait measurements are noisy, to settings where the
opposite is true. For each of the 4 ,500 datasets, 300 genotypes were randomly selected as the
training set. Prediction accuracy was calculated as the Pearson correlation between predictions
and the simulated focal trait genetic component for the test set. We did not redundancy filter
the simulated data for any of the methods. In addition to the models, we obtained benchmark
predictions by using the true simulated latent signal factors as secondary features in the BLUP
equations. We only evaluated MegaLMM and the neural networks for the first 20 datasets of
each combination due to time and computational constraints.
3.2. Results. The impact of genetic parameters like the focal trait heritability and unique vari-
ance is clear (Figure 2). With the exception of the high focal trait unique variance setting, the
CV1 accuracy of most multivariate approaches is, at worst, on par with that of the univariate
model across the range of focal trait heritabilities. Furthermore, CV1 accuracies of all meth-
ods, except the neural networks, converge to more or less the same point ( ρ≈ 0.64) as h2(y)
increases, highlighting that secondary features bring the biggest benefit when the focal trait is
hard to measure accurately and thus has a low heritability.
Most methods significantly outperform the univariate model in CV2, provided the quality of
the secondary features is high enough. Looking at the setting with the highest quality secondary
features, i.e., ψy = 0.2, improvements with respect to the univariate approach reach approx-
imately 40% to 125% depending on the focal trait heritability and model. Overall, glfBLUP
performs best, closely followed by MegaLMM. The difference between MegaLMM and glfBLUP
is mainly visible at the lowest focal trait heritability. This might be due to the supervised nature
of MegaLMM, where noisy focal trait data is detrimental when included in the modelling. The
lsBLUP and siBLUP approaches show similar performance with siBLUP being slightly better.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 11
s1,...,s 100
s101,...,s 200
s201,...,s 300
s301,...,s 400
s401,...,s 500
s501,...,s 600
s601,...,s 700
s701,...,s 800
LSF1
LSF2
LSF3
LSF4
LNF1
LNF2
LNF3
LNF4
y
h2(s)∈{ 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}
σ2
g(s) +σ2
ϵ (s) = 1
h2(y)∈{ 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9}
σ2
g(y) +σ2
ϵ (y) = 1
ψp+1∈{ 0.8, 0.5, 0.2}
ψq∼±U

1− (0.3)2, 1− (0.8)2
Figure 1. The basic model underlying the simulated datasets. Groups of ob-
served secondary features are shown as rectangles while genetic latent factors
are shown as circles. Secondary feature unique variances ψq were sampled from
a uniform distribution ψq∼U

1− (0.3)2, 1− (0.8)2
. The focal trait unique
variance ψp+1 was 0.8, 0.5, or 0.2. Note that the latent noise factors ( LNF )
and thus S401,...,S 800 are not genetically correlated to the focal trait. Ran-
dom residual correlations among secondary features and between the secondary
features and focal trait are not shown.
While the CV2 accuracy for the neural networks is higher than its CV1 accuracy, both are sig-
nificantly lower than any of the other models, including the univariate approach. We provide
results for two more secondary feature heritabilities in the Appendix.
4. Analysis of CIMMYT wheat data
In addition to the extensive simulations provided in the previous section we also evaluated
the different approaches in terms of accuracy and interpretability using wheat data from Centro
Internacional de Mejoramiento de Ma´ ız y Trigo (CIMMYT) [19]. The following two sections
provide details on the dataset, pre-processing, and results.
4.1. Data description and pre-processing. The CIMMYT wheat dataset contains measure-
ments on grain yield and crop canopy hyperspectral reflectivity at 62 wavelengths between 398nm
and 847nm. The data were collected for four breeding cycles and five managed treatments within
each cycle. We limited ourselves to two subsets of the data to compare glfBLUP and the other
methods. The subsets we analyzed (breeding cycle 2014–2015, treatment B5IR and HEAT) con-
tain 39 trials, 1094 unique genotypes, and reflectance measurements at ten and four timepoints
for a total of 620 and 248 timepoint-wavelength combinations (referred to as the secondary fea-
tures), respectively. The B5IR treatment represents optimal growing conditions with five flood
irrigations during the growth cycle with sowing in Late November/early December. The HEAT
treatment consists of five furrow irrigations and a sowing date in late February, resulting in
higher temperatures throughout the growth cycle. Note that “trial” refers to a factor that is
12 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure 2. Prediction accuracies for several methods in the CV1 and CV2 sce-
narios as we vary the focal trait communality and heritability at a secondary
feature heritability of 0 .7. The benchmark predictions use the true simulated
factor scores and covariance matrices for multivariate genomic prediction. Fur-
ther details regarding these simulations can be found in Section 3.1. Results for
more secondary feature heritabilities can be found in the Appendix
part of the experimental design and not a trial in the multi-environment trial (MET) context.
The timepoints span the vegetative, heading (flowering), and grain-filling growth phases. Each
trial had 28 trial-specific genotypes and two check genotypes that occurred in every trial, all
replicated three times. Trials were structured according to a resolvable incomplete block design.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 13
Marker data were available for 1033 of the 1094 genotypes. One genotype had missing yield for
the B5IR treatment, leaving us with 1032 genotypes for that subset. Yield was missing for 214
of 1033 genotypes for the HEAT treatment, leaving us with 819 for further analyses.
We first resolved the experimental design for each secondary feature and yield using the
following SpATS (Spatial Analysis of Field Trials with Splines) model implemented in LMMsolver
[35, 34, 4]:
(17) y(i|j)klmt =µ +gjt +tkt +rlt +cmt +ft (r,c ) +ϵ(i|j)klmt,
wherey(i|j)klmt is yield or any of the secondary features for replicate i given genotypej in trialk
with row numberl and column numberm, measured at timepointt. The overall mean is given by
µ andgjt is the fixed genotypic effect. The random trial effecttkt is assumed to be independently,
identically, and normally distributed with mean zero and variance σ2
t : tk∼N (0,σ 2
t ). Similarly,
rlt∼N (0,σ 2
r),cmt∼N (0,σ 2
c), andϵ(i|j)klmt∼N (0,σ 2
ϵ ) for the random row and column effects,
as well as the residual effect. The two-dimensional smooth surface over row and column positions
is defined byft (r,c ). We then created the pseudo-CRD data for each timepoint by simply adding
the estimated genetic effects and residuals from model (17):
y(q|j)t =µ + ˆgjt + ˆϵ(i|j)klmt.
Note that due to the elimination of the design factors we can replace the indices i, k, l, and
m by a single index q that denotes replicate q of genotype j. For the secondary features we
then fit three-level nested hierarchical growth models through the ten (B5IR) and four (HEAT)
timepoints and took fitted values as our final corrected data [34]. We finally created 250 datasets
for each managed treatment by randomly sampling 12 trials as the test set and the remaining
trials as the training set. We note that by creating training and test sets after pre-processing
the data we are violating the independence between training and test set to some extent. Fully
separated pre-processing of the training and test data is infeasible, however, as we need the
complete data to perform the spatial corrections. Furthermore, full separation would require
fitting an infeasibly large number of linear mixed models for pre-processing.
We scaled and centered yield as well as the hyperspectral features separately for the training
and test set prior to analyzing the data. We calculated the CV1 prediction accuracy as the
correlation between predictions and the BLUEs (ˆgj) obtained from model (17). For the CV2
prediction accuracies we used the parametric correction described by Runcie and Cheng [36]. In
addition to including test set hyperspectral measurements from all timepoints (CV2), we also
evaluated the impact of including only measurements from the vegetative phase (CV2VEG),
again using the parametric correction. We used a redundancy filtering threshold τ = 0.95 for all
multivariate approaches as this provides a good trade-off between excluding redundant features,
reducing computational complexity, and maintaining enough features to identify latent factors.
Details on the methods other than glfBLUP can be found in SM Section 4.
4.2. Results. The relative performance of the different models clearly depends on the subset of
the data and thus the managed treatment (Figure 3). Our proposed pipeline performs best in
the HEAT treatment while lsBLUP performs best for B5IR. All multivariate approaches show
CV1 performances that are more or less similar to the performance of the univariate model, with
the exception of the deep learner which performs significantly worse in all scenarios. For the
other approaches CV2 performance is clearly higher than the univariate model, especially in the
B5IR treatment. Only including test set hyperspectral measurements from the vegetative phase
provided a benefit in B5IR but not in the HEAT treatment, possibly due to the fact that there
was only a single measuring point during the vegetative phase for HEAT.
The pattern of wavelengths that were retained after redundancy filtering was not constant
across the ten dates for B5IR and four dates for HEAT, although most retained wavelengths
represented the blue, red, and near infra-red part of the spectrum. A graphical overview of what
features were retained after filtering can be found in SM Section 7.
14 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure 3. Prediction accuracies for several methods in the CV1, CV2, and
CV2VEG scenarios for two managed treatments for the wheat yield and hy-
perspectral reflectivities dataset. Redundancy filtering was carried out for all
multivariate analyses with a threshold τ = 0.95.
We reanalyzed the data from one of the timepoints (10-03-2015) of the B5IR treatment to
assess the interpretability of glfBLUP and the other approaches. We omitted the redundancy
filtering step, resulting in 62 wavelengths. Figure 4 shows the glfBLUP factor loadings obtained
through this analysis. All three factors were highly heritable atH2 = 0.98 for factor 1,H2 = 0.96
for factor 2, andH2 = 0.95 for factor 3, whereH2 denotes the wide-sense heritability as variances
were estimated using sums of squares and are thus not additive only. Genetic correlations between
the factors and yield were −0.67 for factor 1, 0 .26 for factor 2, and 0 .16 for factor 3. Through
these correlations and the factor loadings, it is immediately clear that higher yielding genotypes
tended to have lower reflectivities in the green-red part of the spectrum or higher reflectivities
in the near-infrared (NIR) part. These results are somewhat reminiscent of the normalized
difference vegetation index (NDVI) that is highly correlated with yield and is high itself for
crop canopies with high NIR reflectivity and low red light reflectivity [39]. This showcases the
ability of glfBLUP to reveal biologically relevant patterns in high-throughput phenotyping data.
We provide details on the interpretability of the other approaches in SM Section 5. We did
not include deep learning here as it was impossible to extract any biological meaning from the
parameters of the neural networks. We provide some data on the computational complexity of
glfBLUP and other methods in SM Section 6.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 15
Figure 4. Loadings for the 62 wavelengths and three factors found using glf-
BLUP and the hyperspectral data from 10-03-2015. Estimated genetic correla-
tions between the three factors and yield are also shown.
5. Discussion
With the recent innovations in HTP techniques and the corresponding increase in data avail-
able to plant breeders, the development of methodology for integrating these data has become
increasingly relevant. We have shown that the proposed methodology glfBLUP performs on par
or better than alternatives and is able to integrate secondary HTP data efficiently without loss
of interpretability.
We used simulations to evaluate the impact of several genetic parameters on model perfor-
mance. Of these parameters, the focal trait heritability is of particular interest. One of the key
motivations for the use of secondary data in multivariate genomic prediction is the belief that
these data can improve predictions in cases where the focal trait phenotype has low heritability
[22]. The proposed glfBLUP performs well in such cases due to its unsupervised nature. It does
not suffer from overfitting at low focal trait heritabilities like some alternative approaches seem
to do.
Our approach also does not rely as heavily on hyperparameter tuning as approaches such as
deep learning. The performance of the neural networks on both the simulated data as well as the
real data was significantly lower than any of the other models. This could very well be a result
of the chosen architecture and hyperparameters not being optimal. This result immediately
showcases the difficulty with many machine learning approaches. Proper hyperparameter tuning
is either time consuming, computationaly expensive, or both. We thus view the minimal required
tuning in glfBLUP as a major advantage.
Another advantage of glfBLUP over machine learning approaches is the interpretability. We
evaluated interpretability by analyzing a wheat yield and hyperspectral reflectivity dataset. We
found that two of the three obtained factors were responsible for the (co)variation in reflectivities
of visible and NIR light. Combined with the genetic correlations between these factors and yield
we found a pattern similar to the NDVI which is known to be a good indicator of yield [27].
As large-scale data collection becomes increasingly accessible, the complexity of datasets and
the importance of understanding biological implications increases as well [8]. Given the results
obtained here, incorporating generative factor analysis in genomic prediction seems an effective
way of tackling these challenges.
Regarding factor analysis, we opted to use maximum likelihood estimation and a modified
Thomson regression approach to obtain estimates of the loadings, unique variances, and factor
scores [17, 40]. Other approaches based on principal component analysis exist as well [e.g., 45, 12]
16 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
and may be an alternative to obtain estimates in cases where the data contains heteroskedastic
noise.
There are other implementations of the factor model too [38, 42]. These models provide an
attractive single-step approach to modelling multi-trait data by assuming a factor analytic struc-
ture for the genetic covariance matrix of traits and estimating any parameters using restricted
maximum likelihood. While the single-step nature of these models is attractive, their compu-
tational complexity means they are typically not used for data with hundreds or potentially
thousands of traits [37]. The approach we present here combines the attractive properties of
factor analysis with a pipeline that avoids the computationally complex characteristics of the
single-step mixed model approaches.
We recognize several options to extend the proposed methodology. While the unsupervised
approach of glfBLUP worked well here, likely due to the noisy nature of the focal trait data, there
are benefits to using a supervised approach. One way of achieving this would be to use a factor
regression approach [29]. Conditioning on the prediction target may lead to higher accuracy when
the focal trait training data is of sufficient quality. Another option would be to consider several
ways of integrating multiple data modalities as opposed to using a single (e.g., hyperspectral)
modality as we did here. There are various methods that can generally be categorized into early
integration, intermediate integration, or late integration [31]. These integration approaches each
try to balance parsimony and accuracy. It may be fruitful to develop methodology that finds the
right balance between the parsimony and accuracy of different integration approaches within the
context of genomic prediction. Finally, there is the issue of multi-year, multi-environment trials
[7]. By analyzing a trait of interest measured in several environments using a multivariate model,
glfBLUP could reveal latent drivers of environment-specific variety performance. Combining this
approach with dynamic factor analysis [28] would provide a promising framework to model the
main source of data in large breeding programs.
In any case, the glfBLUP methodology we propose here is a robust and relatively efficient
approach to obtaining multivariate genomic predictions with several promising options regarding
extensions and further research.
6. Data availability
Code to generate the data and results presented in this paper are available at https://
github.com/KillianMelsen/glfBLUP_2025. The full hyperspectral dataset is available upon
reasonable request from J. Crossa. The proposed approach glfBLUP has been implemented in
an R-package available at https://github.com/KillianMelsen/glfBLUP.
Appendix: Additional simulation results
Here we provide some additional results using the simulated data (Figure 5). Compared to the
h2(s) = 0.7 setting the conclusions for h2(s) = 0.5 and h2(s) = 0.9 are largely similar. Overall,
there is a slight decrease in accuracy when the heritability of the secondary features drops,
but the focal trait unique variance and thus the degree to which the focal trait is genetically
correlated to the secondary features is far more important.
References
[1] Adak, A., Kang, M., Anderson, S.L., Murray, S.C., Jarquin, D., Wong, R.K.W., and Katzfuß, M. (2023). Phe-
nomic data-driven biological prediction of maize through field-based high-throughput phenotyping integration
with genomic data. Journal of Experimental Botany 74, 5307–5326. https://doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erad216
[2] Anderson, W.T. (2003). An introduction to multivariate statistical analysis. Wiley, 3rd ed., Hoboken, NJ,
USA.
[3] Arouisse, B., Theeuwen, T.P.J.M., van Eeuwijk, F.A., and Kruijer, W. (2021). Improving genomic prediction
using high-dimensional secondary phenotypes. Frontiers in Genetics 12, 667358. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fgene.2021.667358
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 17
Figure 5. Prediction accuracies for several methods in the CV1 and CV2 sce-
narios as we vary the focal trait communality, focal trait heritability, and sec-
ondary feature heritabilities. The benchmark predictions use the true simulated
factor scores and covariance matrices for multivariate genomic prediction. Fur-
ther details regarding these simulations can be found in Section 3.1.
[4] Boer, M.P. (2023). Tensor product P-splines using a sparse mixed model formulation. Statistical Modelling
23, 465–479. https://doi.org/10.1177/1471082X231178591
[5] Brent, R.P. (1973). ”Chapter 5: An algorithm with guaranteed convergence for finding a minimum of a
function of one variable”, Algorithms for minimization without derivatives. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA.
18 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
[6] Crossa, J., P´ erez, P., Hickey, J., Burgue˜ no, J., Ornella, L., Cer´ on-Rojas, J., Zhang, X., Dreisigacker, S.,
Babu, R., Li, Y., Bonnett, D., and Mathews, K. (2013). Genomic prediction in CIMMYT maize and wheat
breeding programs. Heredity 112, 48–60. https://doi.org/10.1038/hdy.2013.16
[7] Cullis, B.R., Jefferson, P., Thompson, R., and Smith, A.B. (2014). Factor analytic and reduced animal
models for the investigation of additive genotype-by-environment interaction in outcrossing plant species
with application to a Pinus radiata breeding programme. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 127, 2193–2210.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00122-014-2373-0
[8] Danilevicz, M.F., Gill, M., Anderson, R., Batley, J., Bennamoun, M., Bayer, B.E., and Edwards, D. (2022).
Plant genotype to phenotype prediction using machine learning. Frontiers in Genetics 13, 822173. https:
//doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.822173
[9] Dahl, A., Hore, V., Iotchkova, V., and Marchini, J. (2013). Network inference in matrix-variate Gaussian
models with non-independent noise. arXiv, 1312.1622. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1312.1622
[10] Dai, F., Dutta, S., and Maitra, R. (2020). A matrix-free likelihood method for exploratory factor analysis
of high-dimensional gaussian data. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics 29, 675–680. https:
//doi.org/10.1080/10618600.2019.1704296
[11] Endelman, J.B. (2011). Ridge regression and other kernels for genomic selection with R-package rrBLUP.
The Plant Genome 4, 250–255. https://doi.org/10.3835/plantgenome2011.08.0024
[12] Fan, J., Wang, K., Zhong, Y., and Zhu, Z. (2022). Robust high dimensional factor models with applications
to statistical machine learning. Statistical Science 36, 303–327. https://doi.org/10.1214/20-STS785
[13] Fotheringham, A.S., and Oshan, T.M. (2016). Geographically weighed regression and multicollinear-
ity: dispelling the myth. Journal of Geographical Systems 18, 303–329. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10109-016-0239-5
[14] Harfouche, A.L., Jacobson, D.A., Kainer, D., Romero, J.C., Harfouche, A.H., Mugnozza, G.S., Moshelion,
M., Tuskan, G.A., Keurentjes, J.J.B., and Altman, A. (2019). Accelerating climate resilient plant breeding
by applying next-generation artificial intelligence. Trends in Biotechnology 37, 1217–1235. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2019.05.007
[15] Higham, N.J. (2002). Computing the nearest correlation matrix - a problem from finance. IMA Journal of
Numerical Analysis 22, 329–343. https://doi.org/10.1093/imanum/22.3.329
[16] Horton, M.W., Hancock, A.M., Huang, Y.S., Toomajian, C., Atwell, S., Auton, A., Muliyati, N.W., Platt,
A., Sperone, F.G., Vilhj´ almsson, B.J., Nordborg, M., Borevitz, J.O., and Bergelson, J. (2012). Genome-wide
patterns of genetic variation in worldwide Arabidopsis thaliana accessions from the RegMap panel. Nature
Genetics 44, 212–217. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.1042
[17] J¨ oreskog, K.G. (1967). Some contributions to maximum likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika 32, 443–
482. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289658
[18] Kaiser, H.F. (1958). The varimax criterion for analytic rotation in factor analysis. Psychometrika 23, 187–
200. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02289233
[19] Krause, M.R., Gonz´ alez-P´ erez, L., Crossa, J., P´ erez-Rodr´ ıguez, P., Montesinos-L´ opez, O., Singh, R.P.,
Dreisigacker, S., Poland, J., Rutkoski, J., Sorrells, M., Gore, M.A., and Mondal, S. (2019). Hyperspectral
reflectance-derived relationship matrices for genomic prediction of grain yield in wheat. G3 9, 1231–1247.
https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.118.200856
[20] Kruijer, W., Behrouzi, P., Bustos-Korts, D., Rodr´ ıguez-´Alvarez, M.X., Mahmoudi, S.M., Yandell, B., Wit, E.,
and van Eeuwijk, F.A. (2020). Reconstruction of networks with direct and indirect genetic effects. Genetics
214, 781–807. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.119.302949
[21] Ledermann, W. (1937). On the rank of the reduced correlational matrix in multiple-factor analysis. Psy-
chometrika 2, 85–93. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02288062
[22] Lopez-Cruz, M., Olson, E., Rovere, G., Crossa, J., Dreisigacker, S., Mondal, S., Singh, R., and de los
Campos, G. (2020). Regularized selection indices for breeding value prediction using hyper-spectral image
data. Scientific Reports 10, 8195. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65011-2
[23] Lumley, T. (2020). leaps: regression subset selection.. R-package version 3.1, https://CRAN.R-project.org/
package=leaps https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.leaps
[24] Marˇ cenko, V.A., and Pastur, L.A. (1967). Distribution of eigenvalues for some sets of random matrices.
Mathematics of the USSR-Sbornik 1, 457–483. https://doi.org/10.1070/SM1967v001n04ABEH001994
[25] Meuwissen, T.H., Hayes, B.J., and Goddard, M.E. (2001). Prediction of total genetic value using genome-
wide dense marker maps. Genetics 157, 1819–1829. https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/157.4.1819
[26] Meyer, K., and Kirkpatrick, M. (2010). Better estimates of genetic covariance matrices by ”bending” using
penalized maximum likelihood. Genetics 185, 1097–1110. https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.109.113381
[27] Mkhabela, M.S., Bullock, P., Raj, S., Wang, S., and Yang, Y. Crop yield forecasting on the Canadian prairies
using MODIS NDVI data. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 151, 385–393. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
agrformet.2010.11.012
[28] Molenaar, P.C. (1985). A dynamic factor model for the analysis of multivariate time series. Psychometrika
50, 181–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02294246
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 19
[29] M¨ unch, M.M., van de Wiel, M.A., van der Vaart, A.W., and Peeters, C.F.W. (2022). Semi-supervised
empirical Bayes group-regularized factor regression. Biometrical Journal 64, 1289–1306. https://doi.org/
10.1002/bimj.202100105
[30] Ott, R., and Longnecker, M. (2015). An introduction to statistical methods and data analysis. Cengage
Learning, 7th ed., Boston, MA, USA.
[31] Pavlidis, P., Weston, J., Cai, J., and Grundy, W.N. (2001). Gene functional classification from heterogeneous
data. In: Proceedings of the fifth annual international conference on computational biology. Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/369133.369228
[32] Peeters, C.F.W. (2012). Bayesian exploratory and confirmatory factor analysis. PhD thesis, Utrecht Univer-
sity, the Netherlands.
[33] Peeters, C.F.W., ¨Ubelh¨ or, C., Mes, S.W., Martens, R., Koopman, T., de Graaf, P., van Velden, F.H.P.,
Boellaard, R., Castelijns, J.A., te Beest, D.E., Heymans, M.W., and van de Wiel, M.A. (2019). Stable
prediction with radiomics data. arXiv, 1903.11696. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1903.11696
[34] P´ erez-Valencia, D.M., Rodr´ ıguez-´Alvarez, M.X., Boer, M.P., Kronenberg, L., Hund, A., Cabrera-Bosquet,
L., Millet, E.J., and van Eeuwijk, F.A. (2022). A two-stage approach for the spatio-temporal analysis of high-
throughput phenotyping data. Scientific Reports 12, 3177. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-06935-9
[35] Rodr´ ıguez-´Alvarez, M.X., Boer, M.P., van Eeuwijk, F.A., and Eilers, P.H.C. (2018). Correcting for spatial
heterogeneity in plant breeding experiments with P-splines. Spatial Statistics 23, 52–71. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.spasta.2017.10.003
[36] Runcie, D., and Cheng, H. (2019). Pitfalls and remedies for cross validation with multi-trait genomic pre-
diction methods. G3 9, 3727–3741. https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.119.400598
[37] Runcie, D.E., Qu, J.Q., Cheng, H., Crawford, L. (2021). MegaLMM: Mega-scale linear mixed models
for genomic predictions with thousands of traits. Genome Biology 22, 213. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13059-021-02416-w
[38] Smith, A., Cullis, B., and Thompson, R. (2001). Analyzing variety by environment data using multiplicative
mixed models and adjustments for spatial field trend. Biometrics 57, 1138–1147. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.0006-341X.2001.01138.x
[39] Teal, R.K., Tubana, B., Girma, K., Freeman, K.W., Arnall, D.B., Walsh, O., and Raun, W.R. (2006).
In-season prediction of corn grain yield potential using normalized difference vegetation index. Agronomy
Journal 98, 1488–1494. https://doi.org/10.2134/agronj2006.0103
[40] Thomson, G. (1939). The factorial analysis of human ability. University of London Press, London, UK.
[41] Togninalli. M., Wang, X., Kucera, T., Shrestha, S., Juliana, P., Mondal, S., Pinto, F., Govindan, V., Crespo-
Herrera, L., Huerta-Espino, J., Singh, R.P., Borgwardt, K., Poland, J. (2023). Multi-modal deep learning
improves grain yield prediction in wheat breeding by fusing genomics and phenomics. Bioinformatics 39,
btad336. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btad336
[42] Tolhurst, D.J., Mathews, K.L., Smith, A.B., and Cullis, B.R. (2019). Genomic selection in multi-environment
plant breeding trials using a factor analytic linear mixed model. Journal of Animal Breeding and Genetics
136, 279–300. https://doi.org/10.1111/jbg.12404
[43] van Wieringen, W.N., and Peeters, C.F.W. (2016). Ridge estimation of inverse covariance matrices from high-
dimensional data. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 103, 284–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
csda.2016.05.012
[44] Woodbury, M.A. (1950). Inverting modified matrices. Memorandum Report 42, Statistical Research Group,
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
[45] Zhang, A.R, Cai, T.T., and Wu, Y. (2022). Heteroskedastic PCA: Algorithm, optimality, and applications.
Annals of Statistics 50, 53–80. https://doi.org/10.1214/21-AOS2074
[46] Zhou, X, and Stephens, M. (2014). Efficient multivariate linear mixed model algorithms for genome-wide
association studies. Nature methods 11, 407–409. https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2848
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 1
Supplementary Material: Improving Genomic Prediction using
High-dimensional Secondary Phenotypes: the Genetic Latent Factor
Approach
S.1. Genomic prediction
We more or less follow the notation of Runcie and Cheng [S9] and Arouisseet al. [S2]. Let Y∈
Rn×(p+1) be the data matrix containing unreplicated, mean-centered, and scaled measurements
onp secondary features and the focal trait for n genotypes. We can divide the n genotypes into
a test and training set so that n =nt +no (t for test and o for the observed training set). The
matrix Y can then be partitioned as:
Y =
Yst yft
Yso yfo

=
Y.t
Y.o

,
where Yst and Yso (s for secondary) are the sub-matrices containing the HTP features for the
test and training set, respectively. Similarly, yft and yfo (f for focal) are the column vectors
containing the focal trait for the test and training set.
The measurements in the data matrix Y are composed of genetic effects, residual effects, and
possibly covariates so that Y = Xβ + G + E. The random matrices for the genetic and residual
effects come from matrix normal distributions:
G∼MN n,p+1(0, K, Σg)
E∼MN n,p+1(0, In, Σϵ),
where the row-covariances are the kinship matrix K and the identity matrix In for the genetic
and residual effects. The column-covariances are the genetic and residual covariance matrices
of the secondary features and focal trait. Assuming that Y is only composed of genetic and
residual effects, a standard result shows that the column-wise vectorization of Y, denoted as
vec(Y), follows a multivariate normal distribution:
vec(Y) = vec(G) + vec(E)∼N n(p+1)(0, Σg⊗ K + Σϵ⊗ In),
where⊗ denotes the Kronecker product. Similarly to the data matrix itself, we can partition
the kinship and covariance matrices as well:
K =
Ktt Kto
Kot Koo

,
where Ktt and Koo contain the genetic relatedness coefficients within the test and training sets,
respectively. The genetic relatedness coefficients between test and training genotypes are given
by Kto = (Kot)⊤. Furthermore,
Σg =
Σg
ss σg
sf
σg
fs σg
ff

=
σg
s.
σg
f.

Σϵ =
Σϵ
ss σϵ
sf
σϵ
fs σϵ
ff

=
σϵ
s.
σϵ
f.

,
where Σg
ss and Σϵ
ss contain the genetic and residual covariances among secondary features,
σg
ff and σϵ
ff are the scalar focal trait genetic and residual variances, and σg
sf = (σg
fs)⊤ and
σϵ
sf = (σϵ
fs)⊤ contain the genetic and residual covariances between secondary features and the
focal trait.
As mentioned above, there are generally speaking three genomic prediction scenarios depend-
ing on whether secondary data is available for just the training set (CV1), both training and test
set (CV2), or not at all (univariate genomic prediction). We now review the expressions for the
training (Go) and test set ( Gt) BLUPs in these three scenarios.
2 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
In the univariate scenario, we only use information on the focal trait of the training set ( yfo)
to obtain predictions for the test set:
ˆV = ˆσg
ff⊗ Koo + ˆσϵ
ff⊗ Ino
ˆg(uni)
fo =

ˆσg
ff⊗ Koo

ˆV−1

yfo− Xo ˆβf

ˆg(uni)
ft = E

gft|yfo

=

ˆσg
ff⊗ Kto

ˆV−1

yfo− Xo ˆβf

= KtoK−1
oo ˆg(uni)
fo ,
(S1)
where ˆg(uni)
fo and ˆg(uni)
ft are the focal trait univariate BLUPs for the training and test set. Note
that covariates can be included in the term Xo ˆβf. Also note that as ˆσg
ff and ˆσϵ
ff are scalars,
ˆV = ˆσg
ff Koo + ˆσϵ
ff Ino.
In the multivariate CV1 scenario where secondary features are only available for the training
set, predictions can be obtained using:
ˆV = ˆΣg⊗ Koo + ˆΣϵ⊗ Ino
ˆg(CV 1)
fo =

ˆσg
f.⊗ Koo

ˆV−1 vec

Y.o− Xo ˆβ

ˆg(CV 1)
ft = E

gft|Y.o

=

ˆσg
f.⊗ Kto

ˆV−1 vec

ˆY.o− Xo ˆβ

= KtoK−1
oo ˆg(CV 1)
fo ,
(S2)
where Y.o− Xo ˆβ is vectorized. Expression (S2) can be evaluated using a fast algorithm that
decreases the time complexity for the calculation of the focal trait training set BLUPs ˆg(CV 1)
fo
from O(n3
op3) to O(nop2 +p3) by avoiding the naive inversion of ˆV [S5].
The CV2 multivariate predictions can be obtained directly [S2] or through a two-step approach
[S9]. We prefer the two-step approach because the fast algorithm can be used to obtain all CV1
training set BLUPs, ˆG(CV 1)
.o :
ˆV = ˆΣg⊗ Koo + ˆΣϵ⊗ Ino
ˆG(CV 1)
.o = vec−1
h
ˆΣg⊗ Koo

ˆV−1 vec

Y.o− Xo ˆβ
i
.
(S3)
We then convert these training set BLUPs to intermediate CV1 test set BLUPs and combine
those with the observed secondary features for the test set to finally obtain CV2 BLUPs for the
test set focal trait:
ˆV = ˆΣg
ss⊗ K−1
tt + ˆΣϵ
ss⊗ Int
ˆg(CV 2)
ft = E

gft|Yst, Y.o

= KtoK−1
oo ˆg(CV 1)
fo +

ˆσg
fs⊗ K−1
tt

ˆV−1 vec

Yst− KtoK−1
oo ˆG(CV 1)
so

.
(S4)
In all cases, Σg and Σϵ must be estimated from the data.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 3
S.2. Covariance of BLUEs
Consider the secondary feature BLUEs for genotype j which are simply the genotypic means
in the case of a completely randomized experimental design:
¯ys(j) = gs(j) + ¯ϵs(j) = gs(j) + 1
r
rX
i=1
ϵs(i|j),
where gs(j)∼N p(0, Σg
ss) and ϵs(i|j)∼N p(0, Σϵ
ss). All r residual vectors for the replicates of
genotype j are assumed iid, meaning var(ϵs(i|j)) = var(ϵs(i′|j)) = Σϵ
ss and the cross-covariance
matrix for any two replicates of genotype j, cov(ϵs(i|j),ϵs(i′|j)), is a zero matrix. As a result,
var
 rX
i=1
ϵs(i|j)
!
=
rX
i=1
var
 
ϵs(i|j)

=rΣϵ
ss.
Now we divide the sum of the r residual vectors for genotype j by the number of replicates r to
obtain the vector of mean residuals for genotype j:
¯ϵs(j) = 1
r
rX
i=1
ϵs(i|j).
Using the fact that var(ax) =a2var(x) for some scalar a and random vector x, we find that
var
 ¯ϵs(j)

=
1
r
2
var
 rX
i=1
ϵs(i|j)
!
=r−2rΣϵ
ss =r−1Σϵ
ss.
Combined with the assumptions that gs(j) /upmodelsϵs(i|j), and thus that gs(j) /upmodels¯ϵs(j), we obtain the
covariance of the BLUEs as
var
 ¯ys(j)

= var
 
gs(j)

+ var
 ¯ϵs(j)

= Σg
ss +r−1Σϵ
ss.
S.3. Penalty optimization
We use Brent’s algorithm [S3] implemented in theoptimize() function in R to find the optimal
values for ϑg and ϑϵ as described in the main text. In a naive implementation we obtain the
mean cross-validated negative log-likelihood at each iteration as:
(S5) φK(ϑ) = 1
K
KX
k=1
wk

ln


R(ϑ)

¬k
 + tr

Rk

R(ϑ)
−1
¬k

,
where we have omitted some sub- and superscripts for clarity. Note that ( R(ϑ))¬k∈ Rp×p is
the penalized genetic or residual correlation matrix given the corresponding penalty ϑ at the
current iteration. Naive minimization thus requires inverting ( R(ϑ))¬k = (1−ϑ) R¬k +ϑI at
each iteration. Note that h
R(ϑ)
i−1
¬k
= U
h
Λ(ϑ)
i−1
U⊤,
where U contains the eigenvectors of the unregularized correlation matrix R¬k and
Λ(ϑ) = (1−ϑ) Λ +ϑIp
with Λ a diagonal matrix containing the eigenvalues of R¬k. We now rewrite (S5) as:
(S6) φK(ϑ) = 1
K
KX
k=1
wk
(
ln
pY
i=1
Λ(ϑ)ii + tr

RkU

Λ(ϑ)
−1
U⊤
)
.
We can then use the invariance of the trace operator to cyclic permutations to rewrite (S6) as:
(S7) φK(ϑ) = 1
K
KX
k=1
wk
(
ln
pY
i=1
Λ(ϑ)ii + tr

Λ(ϑ)
−1
A
)
,
4 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
where A = U⊤RkU. Within the trace operation in (S7) we are now calculating the matrix
product of the diagonal matrix ( Λ(ϑ))−1 and the non-diagonal matrix A, of which the latter is
independent of ϑ. This can be rewritten as a summation of divisions:
(S8) φK(ϑ) = 1
K
KX
k=1
wk

ln
pY
i=1
Λ(ϑ)ii +
pX
j=1
Ajj
Λ(ϑ)jj

 .
We can calculate the eigenvalues Λ as well as the diagonal entries of A = U⊤RkU before
starting the optimization. As a result, each iteration scales linearly with p resulting in faster
optimization, especially if the optimal penalty values are near the bounds.
S.4. Alternative methods
S.4.1. Univariate gBLUP. The baseline model that we compare all multivariate approaches
to is the standard univariate gBLUP model:
y = Zu +ϵ,
where y is the n× 1 vector containing the mean-centered and scaled focal trait phenotypes, Z is
the incidence matrix linking individuals to the BLUPs in u∼N ng(0,σ 2
gK), andϵ∼N n(0,σ 2
ϵIn)
contains the residuals. We used the R-package rrBLUP version 4.6.1 [S6] to fit univariate gBLUP
models (see S1). The marker-based kinship matrix was created using the R-package statgenGWAS
version 1.0.9.
S.4.2. siBLUP. The first alternative multivariate approach that we included is a modified ver-
sion of the bivariate gBLUP model using a regularized selection index as proposed by Lopez-Cruz
et al. [S8] and also implemented by Arouisse et al. [S2]. In short, siBLUP uses a regularized
phenotypic covariance matrix of the secondary features and their genetic covariances with the
focal trait to obtain a weight for every secondary feature. We use these weights to calculate a
single linear combination of the secondary features for each individual termed the (regularized)
selection index. We then use this index as the single secondary feature in the multivariate gBLUP
equations (SM Section S.1).
Like glfBLUP, the modified version of siBLUP takes data containing replicates from a com-
pletely randomized design. Next, we obtain ˆΣg
ss and ˆΣϵ
ss using sums of squares, after which
we redundancy filter the dataset so that no two of the remaining secondary features have an
absolute genetic correlation|ρg| equal to, or exceeding a threshold τ.
We then convert the redundancy filtered, plot-levelphenotypic covariance matrix ˆΣp∗
ss = ˆΣg∗
ss +
ˆΣϵ∗
ss of the remaining secondary features to a correlation matrix which is regularized:
ˆRp∗
ss(ϑp) = (1−ϑp) ˆRp∗
ss +ϑpIp∗,
where the optimal penalty ϑ‡
p is found using 5-fold cross validation as described in the main
text using the number of individuals in each fold as the weights wk. We then reconvert the
resulting regularized phenotypic correlation matrix to the covariance matrix ˆΣp∗
ss(ϑ‡
p) and use it
to calculate the vector of selection index weights ˆγSI .
To calculate the selection index weights, we first obtain thep∗×1 column vector ˆσg∗
sf containing
the genetic covariances between the remaining secondary features and the focal trait using sums
of squares. Next, we calculate the vector of selection index weights ˆγSI :
ˆγSI =
h
ˆΣp∗
ss(ϑ‡
p)
i−1
ˆσg∗
sf ,
and use it to calculate the plot-level selection indices:
ˆySI = Y∗
s ˆγSI ,
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 5
where ˆySI is the n× 1 column vector containing the selection index for each individual. The
n×p∗ matrix Y∗
s contains the original (redundancy filtered) secondary features.
We can now replace the original secondary features in the data matrix Ysf by the selection
indices:
YSI,f =
ˆySI yf

,
followed by using sums of squares to obtain ˆΣg and ˆΣϵ which give us the genetic and residual
covariances between the selection index and the focal trait. We then reduce the data to BLUEs
¯YSI,y by calculating the genoypic means, divide ˆΣϵ by the number of replicates, and combine
the data, covariance matrices, and the kinship K in the BLUP equations (see SM Section S.1)
to obtain test set predictions.
S.4.3. lsBLUP. lsBLUP also reduces the secondary features to a single dimension [S2]. For
lsBLUP, this secondary feature is a LASSO regression prediction of the focal trait using the
redundancy filtered set of secondary features.
We use sums of squares obtained from replicated completely randomized design data to esti-
mate Σg
ss. We then use this genetic covariance matrix of the original secondary features (con-
verted to the correlation scale) to redundancy filter the data. After filtering, the LASSO regres-
sion coefficients ˆβLS are obtained using the R-package glmnet version 4.1.6 [S7]. To do so, we
first reduce the redundancy filtered data to genotypic means. We then use the cv.glmnet()
function to determine the optimal (i.e., minimum mean cross-validated error) LASSO penalty
λ‡ using 5-fold cross-validation, thereby obtaining the vector of coefficients given this optimal
penalty ˆβLS(λ‡).
If all coefficients have been regularized to 0, lsBLUP returns simple univariate gBLUP pre-
dictions for the test set using the rrBLUP R -package [S6]. If not, we calculate plot-level LASSO
predictions:
ˆyLS = Y∗
s ˆβLS(λ‡),
where Y∗
s is the matrix containing the redundancy filtered observed secondary features. We then
replace the original secondary features in the data matrix Ysf by the LASSO predictions:
YLS,y =
ˆyLS yf

,
and compute the CV1 or CV2 test set focal trait BLUPs as described for siBLUP and glfBLUP,
using ˆyLSP as the single secondary feature.
S.4.4. MegaLMM. MegaLMM was introduced as a method to make genomic predictions using
many secondary features [S10]. In essence, it decomposes the p original features into two parts.
One part is projected onto M latent factors while the other part represents the p independent
errors for each secondary feature. Independent linear mixed models are then fit for these M +p
decorrelated traits. For the full details on MegaLMM see Runcie et al. [S10].
To be able to make consistent comparisons, we redundancy filtered the full set of secondary
features as we did for other methods prior to calculating the BLUEs and running MegaLMM.
We initialized and ran MegaLMM with default settings. The number of modeled latent factors
M (argument K) was set to 16 for the simulated data and 20 for the hyperspectral data. For the
priors we again used the default settings.
After initializing MegaLMM we first ran 1000 burn-in iterations, reordering the factors after
each 100 iterations, for both simulated and hyperspectral data. We then ran another 500 itera-
tions for the posterior samples. Posterior predictions for each genotype were calculated at each
iteration, with the final predictions being equal to the posterior means. We used version 0.1.0 of
the MegaLMM R-package [S11].
6 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
S.4.5. Deep learning. Deep learning provides a flexible, non-parametric alternative to the mod-
els described above. Here, we limited ourselves to CV1 and CV2 versions of a simple multilayer
perceptron (multiMLP). The only difference between these versions is the inclusion of the scaled
and centered, redundancy filtered set of secondary features in the output layer (CV1) or input
layer (CV2).
We considered the number of hidden layers, number of neurons per hidden layer, and the
dropout regularization rate as the hyperparameters to be tuned separately for each (simulated)
dataset. Other hyperparameters such as the learning rate, early stopping patience, optimizer,
etc. were fixed. After an initial exploration of possible hyperparameter values, we decided to use
either 4 or 8 hidden layers, with 16 or 64 neurons each. The dropout rate was set to either 0 .1
or 0.3. In addition to these values, we opted for the root mean squared propagation optimizer
(RMSProp), a learning rate of 5 × 10−4, the rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function in
all relevant layers, a batch size of 128, and mean squared error (mse) for the loss function.
To obtain predictions for each dataset, we first redundancy filtered the secondary features
like in the other multivariate approaches, followed by reducing the data to BLUEs. We then
divided the training individuals over five folds to determine the within-training set mean cross
validated prediction accuracy for the eight different hyperparameter combinations. We trained
each of the eight networks five times (once for each fold) for at most 25 epochs. Training could
be stopped early based on the loss for a 10% validation split using a patience of 10 epochs. We
then determined the combination of hyperparameter values giving the highest mean prediction
accuracy to be used for training the final network on the full training set. This was done for at
most 100 epochs using early stopping with a patience of 20 epochs and a 10% validation split.
We then obtained test set predictions by feeding the SNP marker matrix (and filtered secondary
features for the CV2 multiMLP) for the test set into the trained networks.
We used the keras (v2.15.0), tensorflow (v2.16.0), and reticulate (v1.40.0) R packages
as an interface to Python (v3.10.16) and TensorFlow (v2.15.1) to implement the deep learning
[S4, S1].
S.5. Interpretability
We have stressed the great ease of interpreting glfBLUP’s model parameters in terms of
biological relevance. Here we present some additional results with regards to interpretability of
the approaches that we compared glfBLUP to. We ran si-, lsBLUP, and MegaLMM on the non-
redundancy filtered B5IR hyperspectral data from 10-03-2015 as we did for glfBLUP. We then
looked at the relevant model parameters that included the selection index weights for siBLUP,
LASSO coefficients for lsBLUP, and (mean) posterior loadings for MegaLMM.
Starting with lsBLUP and siBLUP (Figure S1) we immediately recognize the difficulties as-
sociated with compressing the collinear data to a single dimension. In the case of lsBLUP we
see sign-flipping in the coefficients around the 760nm wavelength. Reflectivities around 660nm,
720nm, and 760nm show a negative relationship with yield following from the genetic correlation
of 0.81 between the LASSO prediction and yield. After 760nm the relationship rapidly becomes
positive, before moving towards 0 again.
The selection index weights of siBLUP are difficult to interpret as well. The relationship
between hyperspectral reflectivity and yield follows a highly irregular pattern along the spectrum.
While si- and lsBLUP require minimal hyperparameter tuning, their lack of flexibility with re-
gards to the selection of an appropriate number of dimensions clearly limits their interpretability
in the case of more complex data.
MegaLMM does provide the flexibility of choosing the number of factors ( M) and thereby
the dimensionality, but leaves this choice to the user. As a result, the ease of interpretation
heavily relies on an appropriate choice of M, which may not be easy to make without any prior
knowledge (Figure S2). We opted for values of M = 3, M = 5, and M = 10, which seemed
appropriate given the fact we found 3 factors using glfBLUP. Note that while the main factors
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 7
representing the infrared and visible part of the spectrum are still present (F1 and F2 forM = 3,
F1, F2, and F3 for M = 5, F6, F3, F2, F5, and F4 for M = 10), ease of interpretation quickly
goes down as the number of factors increases. This is mainly due to the loadings of yield, which
are analogous to the genetic correlations between yield and factors in glfBLUP, becoming divided
over a large number of factors. We also stress that the choice to use a relatively low number
of factors here was informed by the results obtained using glfBLUP. Runcie et al. [S10] use 100
factors to analyze the hyperspectral data in their paper, which would likely make interpretation
even more difficult.
Furthermore, we observe non-stationary behavior in the loading MCMC chains for M = 3
(Figure S3),M = 5 (Figure S4), as well asM = 10 (Figure S5 and S6), even after 10,000 burn-in
and a further 100 ,000 posterior iterations for wavelengths around 700nm (thinning rate of 2).
Non-stationarity is also visible in the traceplots for the loadings of yield on the different factors
(Figure S7).
Figure S1. LASSO regression coefficients (A) and selection index weights (B)
for the 62 wavelengths obtained from running lsBLUP and siBLUP on the B5IR
hyperspectral data from 10-03-2015. Estimated genetic correlations between the
LASSO prediction (LS) or selection index (SI) and yield (Y) are also shown.
S.6. Computational complexity
Obtaining test set predictions for a single CV2 hyperspectral dataset (including all 620
wavelength-date features) took approximately 1.5 seconds for the univariate gBLUP model, 7 sec-
onds for lsBLUP, 200 seconds for siBLUP, 34 seconds for glfBLUP, 1090 seconds for MegaLMM,
and 60 seconds for the CV2 multivariate MLP.
We also simulated datasets containing p = 100 to p = 2500 secondary features representing
10 underlying factors. We analyzed these datasets using glfBLUP, obtaining five runtime mea-
surements (after a single warmup run) for each step in the glfBLUP prediction pipeline at each
value of p, showing that the regularization dominates the pipeline’s total runtime throughout
the range of p (Figure S8).
All computational times were obtained on Windows 11 Pro 23H2, R v4.2.2, using an Intel
i5-13600KF CPU.
8 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure S2. MegaLMM mean posterior loadings for the 62 wavelengths on the 3
(A), 5 (B), and 10 (C) factors used to run MegaLMM on the B5IR hyperspectral
data from 10-03-2015. Mean posterior loadings of yield on the factors are also
shown.
S.7. Redundancy filtering
Figures S9 and S10 provide graphical overviews of the features that remained after redundancy
filtering at a threshold of τ = 0.95 for both managed treatments B5IR and HEAT.
References
[S1] Abadi, M., Barham, P., Chen, J., Chen, Z., Davis, A., Dean, J., Devin, M., Ghemawat, S., Irving, G., Isard,
M., Kudlur, M., Levenberg, J., Monga, R., Moore, S., Murray, D.G., Steiner, B., Tucker, P., Vasudevan,
V., Warden, P., Wicke, M., Yu, Y., and Zheng, X. (2016). TensorFlow: A system for large-scale ma-
chine learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 16)
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 9
(pp. 265-283). USENIX Association. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi16/technical-sessions/
presentation/abadi
[S2] Arouisse, B., Theeuwen, T.P.J.M., van Eeuwijk, F.A., and Kruijer, W. (2021). Improving genomic prediction
using high-dimensional secondary phenotypes. Frontiers in Genetics 12, 667358. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fgene.2021.667358
[S3] Brent, R.P. (1973). ”Chapter 5: An algorithm with guaranteed convergence for finding a minimum of a
function of one variable”, Algorithms for minimization without derivatives. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, USA.
[S4] Chollet, F., et al. (2015). Keras. https://keras.io/.
[S5] Dahl, A., Hore, V., Iotchkova, V., and Marchini, J. (2013). Network inference in matrix-variate Gaussian
models with non-independent noise. arXiv, 1312.1622. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1312.1622
[S6] Endelman, J.B. (2011). Ridge regression and other kernels for genomic selection with R-package rrBLUP.
The Plant Genome 4, 250–255. https://doi.org/10.3835/plantgenome2011.08.0024
[S7] Friedman, J., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. (2010). Regularization paths for generalized linear models via
coordinate descent. Journal of Statistical Software 33, 1–22. https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v033.i01
[S8] Lopez-Cruz, M., Olson, E., Rovere, G., Crossa, J., Dreisigacker, S., Mondal, S., Singh, R., and de los
Campos, G. (2020). Regularized selection indices for breeding value prediction using hyper-spectral image
data. Scientific Reports 10, 8195. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65011-2
[S9] Runcie, D., and Cheng, H. (2019). Pitfalls and remedies for cross validation with multi-trait genomic
prediction methods. G3 9, 3727–3741. https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.119.400598
[S10] Runcie, D.E., Qu, J.Q., Cheng, H., Crawford, L. (2021). MegaLMM: Mega-scale linear mixed models
for genomic predictions with thousands of traits. Genome Biology 22, 213. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13059-021-02416-w
[S11] Runcie, D.E. (2022). MegaLMM: MegaLMM . R-package version 0.1.0.
10 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure S3. MegaLMM (3 factors, 100 ,000 iterations with thinning rate of 2
after 10,000 burn-in iterations) traceplots for the posterior samples for loadings
of wavelengths around 700 nm on the 3 factors (top to bottom).
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 11
Figure S4. MegaLMM (5 factors, 100 ,000 iterations with thinning rate of 2
after 10,000 burn-in iterations) traceplots for the posterior samples for loadings
of wavelengths around 700 nm on the 5 factors (top to bottom).
12 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure S5. MegaLMM (10 factors, 100,000 iterations with thinning rate of 2
after 10,000 burn-in iterations) traceplots for the posterior samples for loadings
of wavelengths around 700 nm on factor 1 - 5. (Continues on next page) .
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 13
Figure S6. (Continued). MegaLMM (10 factors, 100,000 iterations with thin-
ning rate of 2 after 10,000 burn-in iterations) traceplots for the posterior samples
for loadings of wavelengths around 700 nm on factor 6 - 10.
14 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure S7. MegaLMM posterior iterations for the loadings of yield on the
factors for M = 3 (A), M = 5 (B), and M = 10 (C) for the B5IR hyperspectral
data from 10-03-2015.
GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH 15
Figure S8. Composition of total runtime of glfBLUP at different numbers of
secondary features p. The red line shows the total runtime in seconds.
16 GENOMIC PREDICTION: GENETIC LATENT FACTOR APPROACH
Figure S9. Features (wavelength-date combinations) that remain after redun-
dancy filtering using a threshold of τ = 0.95 for the B5IR treatment.
Figure S10. Features (wavelength-date combinations) that remain after re-
dundancy filtering using a threshold of τ = 0.95 for the HEAT treatment.
