Generated using the official AMS LATEX template v6.1
Center-fixing of tropical cyclones using uncertainty-aware deep learning
applied to high-temporal-resolution geostationary satellite imagery
This is the second version (first revision) of an article under review in the
AMS journalWeather and Forecasting.
Ryan Lagerquista,b, Galina Chirokovaa, Robert DeMariaa, Mark DeMariaa, and Imme
Ebert-Uphoffa,c
aCooperative Institute for Research in the Atmosphere, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado
bNational Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Global Systems Laboratory (GSL),
Boulder, Colorado
cDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Colorado State University, Fort Collins,
Colorado
Corresponding author: Ryan Lagerquist, ralager@colostate.edu
1
ABSTRACT: Determining the location of a tropical cyclone’s (TC) surface circulation center –
“center-fixing” – is a critical first step in the TC-forecasting process, affecting current and future
estimates of track, intensity, and structure. Despite a recent increase in automated center-fixing
methods, only one such method (ARCHER-2) is operational, and its best performance is achieved
when using microwave or scatterometer data, which are not available at every forecast cycle. We
develop a deep-learning algorithm called GeoCenter; besides a few scalars in the operational
ATCF, it relies only on geostationary IR satellite imagery, which is available for all TC basins
at high frequency (10 min) and low latency (< 10 min) during both day and night. GeoCenter
ingests an animation (time series) of IR images, including 9 channels at lag times up to 4 hours.
The animation is centered at a “first guess” location, offset from the true TC-center location by
48 km on average and sometimes> 100 km; GeoCenter is tasked with correcting this offset. On
anindependenttestingdataset,GeoCenterachievesamean/median/RMS(rootmeansquare)error
of 26.6/22.2/32.4 km for all systems, 24.7/20.8/30.0 km for tropical systems, and 14.6/12.5/17.3
kmforcategory-2–5hurricanes. ThesevaluesaresimilartoARCHER-2errorswithmicrowaveor
scatterometerdata,andbetterthanARCHER-2errorswhenonlyIRdataareavailable. GeoCenter
alsoperformsskillfuluncertaintyquantification, producingawellcalibratedensembleof150TC-
center locations. Furthermore, all predictors used by GeoCenter are available in real time, which
would make GeoCenter easy to implement operationally every 10 min.
2
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: Estimating the location of a tropical cyclone’s (TC) surface
circulationcenterisacriticalfirststepintheTC-forecastingprocess. Currentandfutureestimates
of several TC properties – including the TC track, intensity, and structure – are highly sensitive
to this initial location estimate, called the “center fix”. This paper describes a new deep-learning
algorithm for center-fixing, called GeoCenter, whose main input is an animated time series of IR
satellite imagery. GeoCenter performs competitively with existing methods for center-fixing, both
operational and non-operational, and provides skillful estimates of uncertainty in the TC-center
location. Furthermore,GeoCenterisdesignedsothatitcouldbeeasilyimplementedinoperations.
1. Introduction
Determining the location of a tropical cyclone’s (TC) surface circulation center is a critical first
step in the forecasting process. Even small errors in the center fix can lead to large errors in other
TC properties, such as the current wind field (Figure 4 of Mayers and Ruf 2019) or intensity.
For example, several articles emphasize the importance of an accurate center fix for Dvorak-based
intensityestimation(Dvorak1984;Veldenetal.2006;OlanderandVelden2007;Knaffetal.2010),
and although they do not provide a numerical estimate of this sensitivity, one can be derived from
knowledge of the Dvorak technique. For example, Dvorak-based intensity estimation requires a
scenetypetobechosenfromfivecategories. Anincorrectcenterfixcouldleadtothewrongscene
type – e.g., shear instead of central dense overcast – which could lead to an error of 2-3 in the
current intensity number (CI) or∼30 kt (Table 2 of Velden et al. 2006).
Smallcenter-fixingerrorscanalsoleadtoinaccurateforecastsoffutureTCprocesses,including
rapid intensification (Kieper and Jiang 2012; Rozoff et al. 2015), and inaccurate forecasts of TC
processescanleadtodownstreamerrorsinweatherforecastsacrosstheglobe(Hemingetal.2019;
Keller et al. 2019). Furthermore, accurate center-fixing is important for post-season analysis and
researchapplications(MayersandRuf2019)andinitializingnumericalweatherprediction(NWP)
models (Leslie and Holland 1995; Trabing and Bell 2020).
Themostaccuratedatasourcesforcenter-fixingareaircraftreconnaissanceandradar. However,
aircraftreconnaissanceiscurrentlylimitedtostormsintheNorthAtlanticandeasternNorthPacific
approaching landfall, while radar data are available only near land-based radar sites. Most TCs
3
occur in the open ocean away from land, which makes satellite imagery the main data source for
center-fixing.
Over the last half-century, many subjective and objective center-fixing methods have been de-
veloped,mostlybasedonsatelliteimagery. However,center-fixingremainsachallenge,especially
for weak systems and those undergoing extratropical transition. Currently, the only automated
(objective)center-fixingmethodusedoperationallyisAutomatedRotationalCenterHurricaneEye
Retrieval (ARCHER-2; Wimmers and Velden 2016, henceforth WV16). ARCHER-2 has known
limitations, including [1] large errors for weak or extratropical systems and [2] its reliance on mi-
crowave and scatterometer data, which are often unavailable, for best performance. For subjective
center-fixing, operational forecasters rely primarily on the Dvorak (1975) technique, whose inputs
are visible and IR satellite data. IR data from geostationary (GEO) satellites are the only satellite
data available during both day and night, for all TC basins around the globe, with high temporal
resolution (10 min) and low latency (< 10 min). Microwave and scatterometer data from low
Earthorbit(LEO)satellites– whichhistoricallyhaveprovidedthemostaccuratecenterfixes( e.g.,
allowing ARCHER-2 to achieve a mean error of 24-31 km, versus 43-49 km for IR data, as shown
in Table 3 of WV16) – are available in tropical regions only twice a day. Furthermore, due to the
geometry of LEO configurations and TC tracks, it is not rare for a specific LEO satellite to have
no observations of a specific TC for 2-3 days consecutively. Thus, it would be highly desirable to
have an accurate, objective center-fixing method that relies only on GEO data.
The remainder of this section provides an in-depth review of existing center-fixing methods,
endingwithashortdescriptionofthemethoddevelopedherein– adeep-learningalgorithmcalled
GeoCenter. GeoCenterusesonlydataavailableinrealtime– primarilyIRdatafromGEOsatellites
– making it deployable in operations. Table 1 provides a list of acronyms for this entire article.
4
Table 1: List of acronyms.
Acronym Definition Acronym Definition
ABI Advanced Baseline Imager onboard GOES-16/17/18 satellites AHI Advanced Himawari Imager onboard Himawari-8/9 satellites
AL North Atlantic ocean basin ARCHER-2 Automated Rotational Center Hurricane Eye Retrieval
ATCF Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System FBT Final best track
CNN Convolutional neural network CPHC Central Pacific Hurricane Center
CRPS Continuous ranked probability score DTMF Monotonicity fraction from discard test
EESD Euclidean ensemble standard deviation EP Eastern North Pacific ocean basin
GEO Geostationary IR Infrared
JTWC Joint Typhoon Warning Center ML Machine learning
MME Multi-model ensemble NHC National Hurricane Center
REL Reliability RHD Rank-histogram deviation
RMS Root mean square RMSD Root mean squared distance (Euclidean)
RMSE Root mean squared error SSRAT Spread-skill ratio
SSREL Spread-skill reliability TC Tropical cyclone
UQ Uncertainty quantification WP Western North Pacific ocean basin
a. Approaches based primarily on Dvorak technique
The subjective Dvorak (1975, 1984) technique is the primary center-fixing method used by
operational TC-forecasting centres worldwide, including the National Hurricane Center (NHC),
Central Pacific Hurricane Center (CPHC), and Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC). The main
purpose of the Dvorak technique is to estimate the current TC intensity, which requires center-
fixing as a first step. To perform center-fixing, the Dvorak technique categorizes the dominant
cloud pattern in the TC (e.g., curved band, central dense overcast, shear, etc.) and then fits a
category-dependent cloud template to the satellite image. The Dvorak technique uses a single
visible/IR image, rather than a time series (animation).
Severalstudieshavetakenstepstoautomate( i.e.,makeobjective)theDvoraktechnique,leading
to the objective Dvorak technique (ODT; Velden et al. 1998), advanced ODT (AODT; Olander
5
et al. 2002), and advanced Dvorak technique (ADT; Olander and Velden 2007), which is now
operational at the NOAA National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service (NES-
DIS)(OlanderandVelden2019). TheADTusesARCHER-2forcenter-fixing,whichincorporates
parallax correction, spiral-fitting to curved cloud bands, ellipse-fitting to the inner eyewall (if
present), thresholding of microwave imagery (if available), and fitting of ambiguity vectors from
scatterometer retrievals (if available).
Othereffortstoautomatecenter-fixingaredescribedbelow; notethatnoneofthesemethodshas
been operationalized.
b. Approaches based solely on fitting specific features
Several methods focus on either spiral-fitting of curved cloud bands or ellipse-fitting of smaller
features such as the inner eyewall or central dense overcast (CDO). In the spiral-fitting literature,
Jaiswal and Kishtawal (2010) used image segmentation to isolate TC clouds from other systems,
followed by image-processing techniques to reduce noise (e.g., smoothing and filtering), and
finallyfittingalogarithmicspiralbandtothedenoisedIRimage. Luetal.(2019)appliedasimilar
approach to fused multi-band (visible, water vapour, and IR) imagery, while Shin et al. (2022)
applied a similar approach to two-channel (longwave IR and water vapour) imagery, averaging
center locations estimated from the two channels into an ensemble.
In the ellipse-fitting literature, Chaurasia et al. (2010) fit contours to the five coldest brightness
temperatures( 𝑇𝑏)in theCDOregion – startingwith theminimum 𝑇𝑏 andincrementing by2K for
each contour – then computed the center of each contour and took the mean of the five centers
as the TC center. Wang et al. (2020) used edge detection to segment clusters of cold cloud tops
(CCT)fromtwo-channelIRimagery,thenusedaHoughcircletransformation(Hough1962;Duda
and Hart 1972) to find the center of each CCT cluster, taking the mean center as the TC center.
You et al. (2022) applied a similar approach to two-channel (one visible and one IR) imagery, but
without the edge-detection step of Wang et al. (2020), which involves finding skeleton points and
is sensitive to noise.
Shin et al. (2022) found that their method outperforms ARCHER-2 on a dataset of 190 TCs
in the western North Pacific. However, a notable shortcoming of both spiral- and ellipse-fitting
methodsisthattheyapplyonlytoasubsetofTCswithcertainstructures( e.g.,clearspiralpatterns
6
orapproximateellipticalsymmetryneartheTCcenter). Forinstance, Wangetal.(2020)notethat
theirmethodcanlocateonly“somespecifictypesofTCcenters,”notincludingtropicaldepressions
or TCs undergoing extratropical transition.
c. Approaches using remotely sensed wind estimates
Remotelysensedwindestimatescanbeatcloudlevel– e.g.,atmosphericmotionvectors(AMV)
derivedfromGEOsatellitedata– oratsea-surfacelevel,derivedfromscatterometersorGPS-signal
reflections.
Center-fixing methods based on cloud-level wind include Zheng et al. (2019), who computed
AMVs from IR imagery provided by the Gaofen-4 satellite1, converted the AMVs to a field called
magnitude of the mean of the direction vectors (MMDV), and then took the minimum of this field
asthe centerofconcentric motion– i.e., theTC center. However, thecomputation ofhigh-quality
AMVs was made possible by the extremely high spatial and temporal resolution of the Gaofen-4
satellite. It is unclear how well the approach of Zheng et al. (2019) would generalize to typical
GEOsatellites,whichhavemuchcoarserresolution(10minand0.5-2.0km,comparedto20sand
50-400 m for Gaofen).
Methods based on sea-surface wind include Mayers and Ruf (2019), who developed a center-
fixingsystemcalledMTrack,basedonGPS-signalreflectionsfromtheCycloneGlobalNavigation
Satellite System (CYGNSS). They showed that MTrack reduces uncertainty in center fixes from
thefinalbest-trackdataset(Section2a),butitisunclearhowwellthissystemworksforasymmetric
storms. Also, for weak storms without a well defined structure, scatterometers do not allow for
precise localization of features, due to directional ambiguity (Lin et al. 2013). Thus, center-fixing
methods based on remotely sensed wind seem to work best for complementing other methods.
d. Deep-learning approaches
The foregoing automated methods are considered expert systems (Reiss and Hofmann 1988;
Kumar et al. 1994),i.e., algorithms with preset rules defined by humans. While human expertise
iscrucial,expertsystemsareoftenoutperformedbystatisticalmodelsthatcanlearnautonomously
fromlargedatasets,inparticulardeeplearning(Goodfellowetal.2016). Inthelastfewyears,deep
1AGEOsatellitelaunchedin2015,stationedat105.5 ◦E,withveryhighspatial(50mforvisible,400mforIR)andtemporal(20s)resolution.
See Xin et al. (2022) for details.
7
learning, especially convolutional neural networks (CNN), have become popular tools for center-
fixing. Unlike traditional NNs and other statistical models, CNNs can directly ingest image data,
including animations and multispectral imagery (e.g., multiple satellite channels). For example,
Wang et al. (2019) trained a CNN on 4-channel IR imagery, with the image center deviating from
the true TC center in both the𝑥- and 𝑦-directions, and tasked the CNN with finding the true TC
center. Yang et al. (2019) used a more complex architecture, based on the U-net (Ronneberger
et al. 2015), to perform semantic segmentation, producing a probability-of-TC-center-presence
at every pixel in the satellite image. Wang and Li (2023) applied a ResNet (He et al. 2016)
architecture with transfer learning2 to 3-channel imagery, with the image center deviating from
the true TC center in only one direction. Smith and Tuomi (2021) trained three CNNs – each
on animations from one IR channel, containing lag times of 0-5 hours – with the image center
being the true TC center from 5 hours ago. They averaged center locations estimated from the
three CNNs into an ensemble. Ho et al. (2024) trained an ensemble of CNNs and convolutional
long-short-termmemory(ConvLSTM)models– usinganimationsfrommultipleIRchannelsand
thevisiblechannelduringtheday,containinglagtimesof0-50min– withtheimagecenterbeinga
6-or12-hourforecastfromtheECMWF.WecomparetheperformanceofGeoCenterwithseveral
deep-learning approaches and ARCHER-2 (Section 5a).
e. Our deep-learning approach
To overcome the limitations of existing center-fixing methods, particularly those that hinder
operational deployment, we present GeoCenter: a deep-learning method powered by an ensemble
of CNNs. Below, we highlight the key features of GeoCenter that enhance its suitability for
operational use.
1. All input data – including IR satellite images and nine scalars from the Automated Tropical
Cyclone Forecasting System (ATCF; Sampson and Schrader 2000) – are available in real
time.
2. The only satellite data used are geostationary IR images, available for all TC basins during
both day and night with 10–15-min resolution and< 10-min latency.
2The model was pre-trained on photographs from the ImageNet dataset (Deng et al. 2009) – where the possible classes are “cat,” “dog,”
“envelope,” etc. – and then fine-tuned to detect TC centers instead.
8
3. PreliminaryresultssuggestthattheperformanceofGeoCenterissimilartothebestARCHER-
2 estimates, which are obtained from microwave and scatterometer data.
4. GeoCenteristrainedandevaluatedon377TCsfromthreeoceanbasins– theNorthAtlantic,
easternNorthPacific,andwesternNorthPacific– usingthefulllifetimeofeveryTC,including
when classified as a disturbance/low, depression, subtropical storm, or extratropical storm.
This makes GeoCenter nearly global and applicable to a wide variety of systems.
5. GeoCenter provides uncertainty quantification (UQ), which can help forecasters gauge the
uncertainty in each center fix. While ARCHER-2 provides UQ as well, in the form of a
confidencescore,GeoCenterprovidesafullsetofpossiblesolutionsviaensembleprediction,
and we verify that these ensembles are well calibrated.
6. GeoCenterleveragesmultispectralanimations,containingdatafrom9IRchannelsatlagtimes
extendingupto4hoursinthepast. Thebasicideabehindthisdesignchoiceisthatsubjective
center-fixing by human forecasters is aided by considering multiple channels and time steps.
Only one existing automated method (Smith and Tuomi 2021) uses multispectral animations.
2. Input data
This section discusses the labels and predictors used to train CNNs. Labels (or “ground truth”)
are the correct answers used to evaluate CNNs.
a. Labels
The ATCF is an operational software package and database with information on multiple TC
properties,includingtheintensity,structure,andcenterlocation. Thisinformationincludescurrent
analyses, official forecasts from TC-forecasting centres in the U.S., and forecasts from several
models. The ATCF is also used as a comprehensive database for historical TCs. After every
hurricaneseason,operationalcentresusethisdatabasetogeneratefinal“besttrack”data,containing
thebestestimatesfor6-hourlycenterlocations(LandseaandFranklin2013). Sincethesefinalbest
tracks (FBT) are created by reanalyzing all available post-event data, they are sometimes different
from preliminary best tracks generated during the season. However, FBTs are not the ultimate
truth. Since FBTs are generated from multiple data sources, each with inherent uncertainty, they
9
represent a smoothed storm track that may not account for high-frequency changes. For details on
FBT accuracy, see Landsea and Franklin (2013). Despite these caveats, FBT is the best available
archive of TC locations, so we use these data to create labels for CNN-training. For convenience,
we will refer to the FBT center as the “true” center.
FBTs are available for every global TC throughout its lifetime, which may include many storm
types: tropical depression/storm, hurricane, disturbance, low, tropical wave, or remnant system
(extra-/post-/sub-tropical). WetrainandevaluateGeoCenteronall6-hourlytimepoints,including
all these storm types.
Due to computing limitations, we train models with IR data at 30-min, rather than 10-min, time
intervals. To match the IR satellite data (Section 2b) and increase the size of our training dataset,
weinterpolateFBTcenterfixesto30-mintimesteps. Specifically,weuseacubicB-splinewithno
smoothingtointerpolateboththelatitudeandlongitudecoordinates. Toassesstheaccuracyofthis
interpolation, we conduct an experiment: we interpolate usingonly synoptic-time FBT centers as
anchor points, reserving the special (off-synoptic-time)3 FBT centers for evaluation. Specifically,
at every special time in the FBT dataset, we compare the interpolated center fix with the FBT
center fix, taking the latter as truth. The error distribution (Figure 1a) has a mean of 9.6 km and
medianof7.3km. SinceFBTcenterfixesareroundedtothenearest0.1 ◦ inlatitudeandlongitude
– yielding a representation error of 7.9 km at the equator and 6.8 km at 45◦N – we consider these
interpolationerrorsacceptable. Thus,wetrainCNNswithdataat30-mintimesteps,mostofwhich
haveaninterpolatedlabel(Figure1b),withbothsynopticandspecialtimesasanchorpointsforthe
interpolation. However, for validation and testing we evaluate only at synoptic times, which have
moreaccuratelabels. Also,notethatforaneventualoperationalimplementationofGeoCenter,the
trained model could be applied with higher cadence than once every 30 min (e.g., to new satellite
data every 10 min).
3Synoptic times – 0000, 0600, 1200, and 1800 UTC every day – comprise the vast majority of the FBT data. Special times often correspond
to landfall.
10
Figure 1: Interpolation of FBT centers, using the B-spline method discussed in the main text. [a]
Histogram of interpolation errors. [b] Case study for a 24-hour period (0600 UTC 8 Nov – 0600
UTC 9 Nov 2020) of Tropical Storm Eta (AL292020). A “special FBT center” (see legend) is one
at an off-synoptic time. For each special FBT center (green star), there is an interpolated center
(orange star) valid at the same time, the interpolation using only synoptic FBT centers as anchor
points. The purple dots are from a second, more accurate, interpolation, which uses all FBT
centers (synoptic and special) as anchor points. The interpolation error at the first special time
(0800 UTC 8 Nov) is 7.9 km; the error at the second special time (0400 UTC 9 Nov) is 23.1 km.
b. Predictors: IR satellite data
Our first source of predictor data is IR imagery from geostationary sensors: the GOES-16
Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI) for the AL basin, GOES-17/18 ABI for the EP basin, and
Himawari-8/9AdvancedHimawariImager(AHI)fortheWPbasin. WeuseaCIRAsatellitearchive
to generate TC-centered images at 30-min time steps; although geostationary data are available
every10min,wesubsampleduetocomputinglimitations. Wegenerateimagesthroughoutthefull
lifetime of every TC in the AL from 2017-2021, in the EP from 2018-2022, and in the WP from
2016-2021. ForeveryTCsample(definition: oneTCatonetimestep),wereprojectimageryfrom
the CIRA database to a 2500-by-2500-km grid with 2-km spacing centered on the FBT center fix,
usingthe platecarrée projectionasspecifiedinthe pyresamplelibrary. Thereprojectedimagery
contains all ten IR channels available on the GOES ABI and Himawari AHI; see Figure 2 and
Table 2. Although the ABI and AHI channels differ slightly in wavelength, we train GeoCenter
11
withdatafrombothsensors,makingnoadjustmenttoaccountforinexactcorrespondencebetween
channels. An alternative approach would be training a separate version of GeoCenter for each
sensor, but this would result in less training data for each of the two versions. A benefit of our
approach– withaunifiedGeoCentermodelforABIandAHI– isthattheunifiedGeoCentermodel
shouldgeneralizewelltoothergeostationarysensorswithslightwavelengthdifferences,suchasthe
Geo-Kompsat-2A Advanced Meteorological Imager (AMI) or Meteosat Third Generation (MTG)
Flexible Combined Imager (FCI).
Wehavedevelopedourownquality-controlalgorithmfortheIRdata,describedinSupplemental
Section1,whichcorrectlyrejectssamplesaffectedbytheloopheatpipe(NOAASTAR2019;Van
Naarden and Lindsey 2019; Section 3.3 of Goodman et al. 2019) issue on the GOES-17 satellite.
Figure2: IRsatelliteimageryvalidat0400UTC9Nov2020forTropicalStormEta(AL292020).
Each panel shows brightness temperature at one spectral channel (colour fill) and the TC center
from FBT (green star).
12
Table 2: IR channels used in this study. Channel𝑘 from the GOES ABI and channel𝑘 from the
Himawari AHI are treated as equivalent, even in cases where the central wavelength or spectral
response function is slightly different.
Channel Central wavelength Central wavelength
for GOES-16/17/18 ABI (𝜇m) for Himawari-8/9 AHI (𝜇m)
7 3.9 3.9
8 6.185 6.2
9 6.95 6.9
10 7.34 7.3
11 8.5 8.6
12 9.61 9.6
13 10.35 10.4
14 11.2 11.2
15 12.3 12.4
16 13.3 13.3
c. Predictors: ATCF scalars
Our second source of predictor data is scalar TC properties from the ATCF. We use the CARQ
(combinedautomatedresponsetoquery)lineintheA-deckfile,whichprovidesreal-timeestimates
of TC properties. Specifically, for every TC sample, we extract the nine scalars listed in Table 3
fromthesecond-mostrecentsynoptictimestep,6to12hoursago. Thus,allGeoCenterpredictors
– bothIRsatelliteimagesandATCFscalars– includeonlydataavailableinreal-timeoperational
settings.
13
Table 3: Scalar ATCF variables used as predictors in this study. Variables below the horizontal
line are related to storm type. “Spatial maximum (minimum)” is a maximum (minimum) over all
points inside the TC.
Variable Explanation
Latitude Latitude of TC center.
Sine of longitude Longitude of TC center. Because longitude is a circular variable (e.g.,
thedifferencebetween-179 ◦ and+179◦ is2◦,not358 ◦),weusethesine
and cosine.
Cosine of longitude See above.
Intensity Spatial-maximum sustained wind speed (1-minute average) at 10 m
above ground
Minimum pressure Spatial-minimum pressure at mean sea level
Storm type
Tropical flag Binary flag. If the ATCF storm type is TD (tropical depression), TS
(tropical storm), TY (typhoon), ST (super typhoon), TC (tropical cy-
clone), or HU (hurricane), the flag is 1. Otherwise, the flag is 0.
Subtropical flag Binary flag. If the ATCF storm type is SD (subtropical depression) or
SS (subtropical storm), the flag is 1. Otherwise, the flag is 0.
Extratropical flag Binary flag. If the ATCF storm type is EX (extratropical) or PT (post-
tropical), the flag is 1. Otherwise, the flag is 0.
Disturbance flag Binary flag. If the ATCF storm type is DB (disturbance) or LO (low),
the flag is 1. Otherwise, the flag is 0.
14
d. Pre-processing: Splitting and normalization
Followingcommonpractice,wesplitourdataintothreesubsets: training,validation,andtesting.
ThetrainingdataareusedtooptimizeCNNparameters(weightsandbiases);thevalidationdata,to
optimizehyperparameters(settingsthatremainstaticduringtraining,likenumberofneurons/layers,
learning rate, etc.); and the testing data, to evaluate the selected CNN model on independent data.
We split the data by basin-year, as shown in Table 4.
After splitting, we normalize the predictor variables. Specifically, for each TC sample, the
following steps are applied independently to 15 predictors (all 10 IR channels and the 5 ATCF
scalars that are not binary flags).
1. Quantile normalization. Convert the variable𝑥 to its quantile over the distribution of𝑥 in the
training data. Let the result be𝑥′, ranging from[0, 1].
2. 𝑧-score normalization. Convert 𝑥′ to a 𝑧-score, using the inverse cumulative distribution
function (CDF) for the standard normal distribution. Let the result be𝑥′′, which ranges from
[−4.75,+4.75].4
Table 4: Splitting of data into independent subsets. One “TC sample” is one TC at one time step.
In the training data these time steps are every 30 min; in the validation and testing data these time
steps are every 6 h (synoptic times only).
Data subset Basin-years Number of Number of
unique TCs TC samples
Training AL 2017-2019, EP 2018-2020, WP 2016-2019234 62 740
Validation AL 2020, EP 2021, WP 2020 76 1160
Testing AL 2021, EP 2022, WP 2021 67 1073
4Ingeneral, 𝑧-scoresrangefrom (−∞,+∞). Forexample,theinverseCDFof0is −∞,andtheinverseCDFof1is +∞. Toavoidinfinitiesand
extremelylargevalues– whichbothhamperCNNperformance– weclip 𝑥′-valuestotherange [0.000001, 0.999999],whichresultsin 𝑥′′-values
ranging from[−4.75,+4.75].
15
3. Methods
Table5providesanoverviewofthechallengesinvolvedinmachinelearning(ML)-basedcenter-
fixing and how we overcome those challenges. For discussions involving hardware, note that each
CNN is trained with eight Tesla P100 graphics-processing units (GPU) and 16 GB of memory per
GPU on NOAA’s Hera supercomputer.
16
Table 5: Overview of challenges involved in ML center-fixing. Note that this table is an overview
of the paper and therefore contains many yet-to-be-defined concepts.
Challenge Solution Solution
described in
• Features at many scales are important.Features used for
operational center-fixing range from 10s of km (inner eyewall,
convective cells) to 100s of km (spiral rain bands).
• Thus, the NN must “look at” both very small and very large
areas. In ML jargon: convolutional filters need receptive fields of
many different sizes.
• NNshavesmallreceptivefieldsbydefault;largereceptivefields
require a “wide” or “deep” architecture (Nguyen et al. 2020).
1. Wide NN: large filters (9× 9 pixels, 11× 11, or even
greater).
2. Deep NN: small filters (3× 3) but many pooling layers,
which serially coarsen image resolution so that for the deepest
convolutional layers, a 3-by-3-pixel filter covers a large physical
area.
• We opt for the deep architecture, which is less memory-
intensive.
Section 3a
• Small sample size.Our training dataset has anominal sample
size of 62 740, but these samples come from 234 unique TCs (see
Table 4). Temporal autocorrelation within each TC makes theef-
fectivesample size≪ 62 740.
• Furthermore,theoriginalimagesarealreadyTC-centered,leav-
ing nothing for the NN to do.
• Dataaugmentation (DA).Foreachoriginalimage,userandom
translations (“jittering”) to create many new images.
• Each new image contains a differentfirst-guess error(offset
between image center and true TC center) to be corrected by the
NN. This allows the NN to learn to correct different kinds of
errors.
• DA increases thenominal sample size more than theeffective
sample size, because all images created by translating one original
image are closely related. Nonetheless, DA increases effective
sample size by a little.
Section 3b
• High dimensionality.One TC sample has dimensions of 1250
(rows)× 1250 (columns)× 10 (IR channels).
• If we also train the NN with a video containing𝐾 lag times,
dimensions grow to 1250× 1250× 10×𝐾 for one data sample.
• A priori,wedonotknowwhatinformationinthishypercube
ismostrelevant. Howmuchspatialcontext(gridsize)isneededfor
accurate center-fixing? How much temporal context (lag times)?
How much spectral info (channels)?
• Furthermore, using all available data leads to slow training and
out-of-memory errors.
• Weperforma hyperparameterexperiment todeterminewhat
information is most relevant.
Sections 3e and 4
• Ensemble adds complexity.We provide an ensemble of TC-
center locations, not a single estimate. Evaluating an ensemble –
or any prediction that includes uncertainty quantification (UQ) –
requiresadditional evaluation tools.
• Weusethecontinuousrankedprobabilityscore(CRPS),spread-
skill plot & associated metrics, discard test & assoc. metrics, rank
histogram & assoc. metrics.
Section 3f
17
a. CNN architectures
Our CNN architecture is similar to the temporal U-net introduced by Chiu et al. (2020), which
is specially designed for predicting a future image based on an animation (time series) of images
from the recent past. An example5 is shown in Figure 3. Our architecture is narrow and deep,
which is a common choice in the ML literature (Nguyen et al. 2020). “Narrow” means that we
use small convolutional filters (here, 3× 3 pixels); “deep” means that we use many pooling layers
to detect features at many spatial resolutions (here, doubling successively from the original 2-km
grid spacing to 128 km). Thus, for the shallowest convolutional layers (left column of figure), the
physical size of the receptive field is 6× 6 km – while for the deepest convolutional layers (right
column), the receptive field is 384× 384 km. This allows the CNN to detect important features at
many scales, ranging from the inner eyewall and convective cells (10s of km) to spiral rain bands
(100sofkm). TheCNNoutputsestimatesoftheoffsetbetweentheimagecenterandTCcenter,in
row-column coordinates. More details about our architecture can be found in Appendix A; a full
list of hyperparameter settings can be found in Supplemental Section 2.
5Withpredictorsincluding300-by-300-pixelIRimagesat9lagtimesand3channels. Notethatdifferentpredictorsetsleadtoslightlydifferent
architectures.
18
Figure 3: One of our specific CNN architectures – with IR predictors (green boxes at left)
including 9 lag times and a 300-by-300-pixel domain. The numbers in each green box are tensor
dimensions. For the raw IR imagery (leftmost column), the dimensions are
𝑁rows× 𝑁columns× 𝑁wavelengths; for all other green tensors (which have passed through at least one
CNN layer, so can no longer be interpreted as raw IR imagery), the dimensions are
𝑁rows× 𝑁columns× 𝑁feature maps. Each column of convolutional layers (e.g., those marked “A” and
“B”) is time-distributed, meaning that weights are shared across the layers. The dashed black
arrows at the right are the “forecasting module” of Chiu et al. (2020), which uses temporal
convolution to combine information across the nine lag times of IR imagery. Besides the IR
imagery, CNN predictors include the ATCF scalars (grey box at bottom-right). These scalars are
concatenated with flattened feature maps from the forecasting module, yielding a feature vector
with length4× 4× 70+ 9= 1129. This feature vector is passed through three fully connected
layers, terminating with a length-100 vector. The first (last) 50 elements are taken as an ensemble
of estimates for the𝑥- (𝑦-)location of the TC center.
19
b. First-guess centers for CNN-training
During pre-processing, we center every IR image on the TC center from FBT, which is the best
availablerepresentationofthetruth. Thus,inimage-center-relativecoordinates,thetrueTCcenter
is always at𝑥= 𝑦= 0 km. However, in real time we do not know the true TC center. Instead, we
haveaccesstoaforecast,whichcouldbeanofficialNHC/CPHC/JTWCforecastoranextrapolated
track from the previous forecast cycle. This forecast is often called the “first guess”. To mimic an
operational setting for CNN-training, we create our own first guesses. Specifically, we randomly
translate each IR image, creating an offset between the image center and true TC center, and task
the CNN with correcting this offset. In the ML literature, applying such random perturbations to
the input data is often called data augmentation (Section 5.2.5 of Chollet 2018).
ThedatapresentedtotheCNNincludeatimeseriesofrecentIRimagery,representingtheTC’s
recent track. In an operational setting, errors occur in the track’s absolute geographic position
(whole-track error) and its shape (track-shape error). Thus, our procedure for creating first-guess
centers includes both types of error (Figure 4).
Figure 4: The two types of error applied to create first-guess TC centers for CNN-training. [a]
Whole-track error (WTE) only, wherein the shape of the track does not change. This does not
realistically mimic an operational setting, where there would be a different error at each lag time.
[b] Both WTE and track-shape error (TSE). Note that TSE is applied independently to every
non-zero lag time,i.e., every time step except the last. However, since WTE≫TSE, total error
(=WTE+TSE) is highly autocorrelated between time steps.
20
Ourprocedureforwhole-trackerrorisasfollows. Thesametranslationvectorisappliedtoevery
2-DsliceoftheCNNinput, i.e.,everypairoflagtimeandIRchannel. Thedistributioninstep1is
similar to first-guess errors seen in operations. For example, based on short-track data (described
in Section 5b) obtained for the AL/EP/WP basins in 2024, the mean Euclidean error is 42.4 km.
Thisisbasedonshort-trackforecastsvalidatsynoptictimesandinitializedthreehoursearlier, i.e.,
halfway between synoptic times.
1. Draw the translation vector from a random distribution. Specifically, draw the length from
max{0km,N( 48km, 24km)} – which is a zero-truncated Gaussian distribution with mean
of 48 km and standard deviation of 24 km – and the direction fromU( 0, 2𝜋), which is a
uniform distribution over the unit circle.
2. The distribution of translation vectors (first-guess errors) is shown in Figure 5a. If the CNN
did nothing, this would be the error distribution for GeoCenter.
3. ConvertthetranslationvectortoCartesiancoordinates( Δ𝑥andΔ𝑦inkm),thentorow-column
coordinates (Δ𝑟 andΔ𝑐 in number of pixels). Since the IR imagery has 2-km grid spacing,
we use the equationsΔ𝑟= 𝑔( Δ𝑦
2 km) andΔ𝑐= 𝑔( Δ𝑥
2km), where𝑔() rounds to the nearest integer.
4. Translate the IR image by the givenΔ𝑟 andΔ𝑐, avoiding edge effects. For example, if the
domainsizeusedbytheCNNis300 ×300,thepre-translationimagemustbelargerthan300
× 300. Otherwise, the post-translation image will have an obvious border, which the CNN
caneasilyuseto“cheat”. Forexample,iftheborderinFigure5cis30rowsthickonthesouth
edge of the image and 40 columns thick on the east edge, the CNN can trivially determine
thatΔ𝑟=+30andΔ𝑐=−40.
5. The CNN is tasked with estimatingΔ𝑟 andΔ𝑐, providing a 50-member ensemble for each
coordinate (Figure 3).
21
Figure 5: CNN-training with random first guesses. [a] Distribution of translation vectors for
whole-track error,i.e., offsets between the first-guess center and true TC center at lag time = 0
min. [b-c] First-guess procedure without accounting for edge effects – not ideal, because the
CNN can use the size of the image border in panel c to “cheat”. [d-f] First-guess procedure with a
buffer zone to eliminate edge effects. Thetranslated and croppedimage (panel f) is the one used
for CNN-training.
The image center in panels b-f is marked with a green star. The procedure illustrated in panels d-f
is used for both whole-track error and track-shape error. For each lag time, the two errors are
added and the procedure is applied once (keeping in mind that track-shape error is 0.0 km for the
0-min lag time).
Our procedure for track-shape error is identical but with two exceptions. First, the length of the
translation vector is drawn from max{0km,N( 10 km, 5 km)}, which makes track-shape error≪
whole-track error. Second, a different translation vector is drawn for every non-zero lag time, as
shown in Figure 4b.
WetraintheCNNwithbatchesof20TCsampleseach,applyingthewholefirst-guessprocedure
(whole-track and track-shape errors) to each sample. One batch never contains more than one
samplefromthesameTC,whichreducesin-batchautocorrelationandincreasesin-batchdiversity.
Because the CNN is trained over many epochs, every TC sample (e.g., Hurricane X at time𝑡) is
22
used more than once, but with a different first-guess error every time. This allows the CNN to
learn to correct different kinds of errors.
c. Uncertainty quantification
Uncertainty can be decomposed into two parts: epistemic uncertainty, arising from deficiencies
of the ML model itself, and aleatory uncertainty, arising from deficiencies of the training data.
Most methods for machine-learned uncertainty quantification (ML-UQ) resolve only one type of
uncertainty, so we combine two methods. To resolve aleatory uncertainty, we use the continuous
ranked probability score (CRPS) method, where the CNN is trained to produce a 50-member
ensemble that minimizes the CRPS loss function. To resolve epistemic uncertainty, we use the
multi-model ensemble (MME) method, which involves training several CNNs. In a typical MME,
all models have the same hyperparameters, differing only in the random seed used to initialize
weights before training. But in our MME, one hyperparameter varies among the models, namely
the set of IR channels used in the predictors. To combine the CRPS and MME methods, we train
four CNN models – each with its own set of IR channels (Table 6) – with the CRPS loss function
and an ensemble size of 50.
By default, we would train each CNN in the ensemble with all 10 channels. However, in an
early experiment (not shown), we found that 10-channel CNNs perform poorly. This is because
10-channelCNNsareveryexpensive– intermsofbothmemory,limitingthecomplexityofCNNs
we can train, and time, limiting the number of training epochs that can be completed. In the same
experiment we found that 1-channel CNNs perform poorly due to a lack of spectral information,
while3-channelCNNsprovideagoodcompromisebetweenthetwoextremes. Wethenperformed
a second experiment to determine the best 3-channel sets out of 10
3
= 120 possibilities. For that
experimentweusedthesamemodel-selectionmethodsdescribedinSection3f, butwithoneextra
constraint. Namely, we chose the best four 3-channel sets such that all 10 channels are used in at
least one CNN. The selected channel sets are shown in Table 6.
For more background on ML-UQ techniques, see Haynes et al. (2023); for more details on our
methodology, see Appendix B.
23
Table 6: Channel sets used to train CNNs. By experimental design, the ensemble should contain
four CNNs, each using a different channel set in the predictors. However, as discussed in Section
5, the final GeoCenter ensemble contains three CNNs, omitting the third channel set listed below.
Rank Channels in set Channels in set
(band number) (GOES ABI wavelength in𝜇m)
Best 11, 12, 15 8.5, 9.61, 12.3
Second-best 7, 10, 16 3.9, 7.34, 13.3
Third-best 7, 8, 9 3.9, 6.185, 6.95
Fourth-best 9, 13, 14 6.95, 10.35, 11.2
d. Bias correction
For every CNN, we bias-correct the ensemble mean via isotonic regression (Barlow and Brunk
1972). Isotonic regression is a post-processing method, trained separately from the CNN. See
Appendix C for details.
e. Hyperparameter experiment
This experiment aims to find the optimal dimensions for IR predictors. Namely, we optimize
two hyperparameters – animation length (number of lag times) and domain size (number of
pixels), which control the amount of temporal and spatial context available to the CNN. Also,
these hyperparameters largely control the memory required for CNN-training, which is important
because our hardware is memory-limited. We experiment with one additional hyperparameter:
whether to train with first-guess errors drawn from a Gaussian distribution, as in Section 3b, or
from a uniform distribution. Specifically, we may draw whole-track error from the distribution
U( 0 km, 120km), instead of max{0 km,N( 48 km, 24 km)}. The uniform distribution leads to a
higher average first-guess error and a higher frequency of very large first-guess errors (e.g., > 100
km). We speculate that training with this wider distribution could make the CNNs more resilient
24
to large first-guess errors. However, the trade-off is that training with a wider error distribution
makes the center-fixing task inherently more difficult, which could hinder successful learning.
At inference time (for validation and testing), we draw whole-track error from the Gaussian
distribution,whichisclosertothefirst-guesserrorsseeninoperations. NotethatCNNshavemany
additional hyperparameters, besides the three optimized in this experiment. See Supplemental
Section 2 for a list of fixed hyperparameters and the values we choose.
Weruntheexperimentasagridsearch,tryingall 6× 4× 2= 48combinationsofthevalueslisted
inTable7. InthisexperimentweusetheCRPS-onlymethodforUQ,whichrequiresoneCNNper
hyperparameter combination, hence 48 CNNs in total. The hybrid CRPS/MME method – used
for our final model (Section 3c) – would require an ensemble of four CNNs per hyperparameter
combination, hence 48× 4= 192 CNNs in total. The former approach takes about one week of
wall-clock time on our hardware, while the latter approach would take a prohibitive four weeks.
WetrainallCRPS-onlymodelsinthisexperimentwiththesamesetofIRchannels: thefirstlisted
in Table 6. After determining the best CRPS-only model (based on validation data), we train four
CRPS-only models with the same hyperparameters, except using a different set of IR channels for
each. ThesefourmodelscomprisethefinalCRPS/MMEmodel,whichweevaluateontestingdata,
using the evaluation metrics outlined below.
Table 7: Experimental hyperparameters. Exact times in the animation are spaced at 30-min
intervals. For example, when the animation length is 3 time steps, the time steps included are
𝑡0, 𝑡0− 30 min, and𝑡0− 60min, where𝑡0 is both the initialization time and the valid time. In other
words, the task is to find the TC’s current center – at𝑡0 – using IR imagery from𝑡0 and the recent
past.
Hyperparameter Values attempted
Number of lag times 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11
Domain size (pixels per side) 300, 400, 500, 600
Domain size (km per side) 600, 800, 1000, 1200
Distribution for first-guess errors Gaussian, uniform
25
f. Evaluation metrics
TodeterminethebestCRPS-onlymodel,weusetheevaluationmetricslistedinTable8. Thefirst
three metrics are based on Euclidean distance between the true TC center and the mean estimated
TC center (henceforth, just “ensemble mean”). Mean absolute bias is also based on the ensemble
meanbutaveragedoverbothcoordinates. Forexample,ifthebiasinthe 𝑥-coordinateis-4.2kmand
thebiasinthe 𝑦-coordinateis+2.8km,themeanabsolutebiasis 1
2(4.2+ 2.8)= 3.5km. Reliability
– alsobasedontheensemblemeanandcoordinate-averaged– isbasedonthereliability/attributes
diagram. This diagram is used to diagnose conditional bias,i.e., bias as a function of the model’s
prediction (Hsu and Murphy 1986; Lagerquist et al. 2021).
To take full advantage of the uncertainty estimates provided by our CNNs, we need additional
evaluation tools. This is the motivation for the last five metrics, explained briefly here and
thoroughly in Section 4 of Haynes et al. (2023). All five metrics are coordinate-averaged. The
CRPSisMAE− 1
2MAPD,whereMAEisthemeanabsoluteerrorachievedbytheensembleaverage
and MAPD is the mean absolute pairwise difference among ensemble members. The spread-skill
reliability (SSREL) is the mean deviation of the spread-skill curve (Delle Monache et al. 2013)
fromthe1:1line. AperfectSSRELof0.0meansthat, givenanyvalueofmodelspread(ensemble
standard deviation;𝜎ens), the expected error (RMSE of ensemble mean; RMSE(𝜇ens)) equals the
spread. The spread-skill ratio (SSRAT) is the mean ratio of𝜎ens to RMSE(𝜇ens) over the entire
dataset,regardlessofspread. TheidealSSRATis1.0,withsmallervaluesmeaningthatthemodel
is overconfident and larger values meaning that it is underconfident.
The monotonicity fraction is based on the discard test, hence the acronym “DTMF”. In general,
the discard test involves incrementing a discard fraction (e.g., from 0% to 5% to 10%. . .to 95%);
for every discard fraction𝑘, the 𝑘% of highest-uncertainty samples are discarded, and the model
errorisrecomputed. Foramodelwithhighlycalibrateduncertaintyestimates(suchthatthemodel’s
uncertainty is highly correlated with its own error), model error should decrease monotonically
with discard fraction. For the discard tests in this study, we define “model error” as the mean
Euclidean distance between the ensemble mean and true TC center, and we define “uncertainty”
26
as the Euclidean ensemble standard deviation (EESD). Mathematically, EESD is
EESD2= 1
𝑁− 1
𝑁∑︁
𝑖=1

(𝑥𝑖
est− 𝑥est)2+( 𝑦𝑖
est− 𝑦est)2
, (1)
where 𝑁 is the ensemble size;𝑥𝑖
est and 𝑦𝑖
est are the estimated TC-center coordinates from the𝑖th
ensemble member; and 𝑥est and 𝑦est are the ensemble-mean TC-center coordinates. Thus, the
bracketed term on the right-hand side is the squared Euclidean distance between the𝑖th member
and the ensemble mean. A perfect DTMF of 1.0 means that model error always decreases when
more high-uncertainty samples are discarded,i.e., the model’s estimate of its own uncertainty is
perfectly correlated with its own error.
Finally,therank-histogramdeviation(RHD)isthemeandeviationofthemodel’srankhistogram
(RH; Hamill 2001) from the perfect RH, which is uniform. A uniform RH means that the correct
answer achieves every rank in the ensemble of predictions with equal frequency. For a perfect
CNN, the 𝑦-coordinate of the true TC center achieves every rank in the ensemble – 1st, 2nd, . . .,
51st – exactly 1
51 = 1.96% of the time. The same applies to the𝑥-coordinate.
We combine the ten metrics in Table 8 subjectively, trading off several desires: a model with
small Euclidean errors, small bias, good reliability, and good uncertainty estimates.
27
Table 8: Evaluation metrics used for model selection. RMS = root mean square; CRPS =
continuous ranked probability score; SSREL = spread-skill reliability; SSRAT = spread-skill
ratio; DTMF = monotonicity fraction in discard test; RHD = rank-histogram deviation.
“Coord-averaged?” indicates whether the metric is averaged over the𝑥- and𝑦-coordinates of the
TC’s position vector. “Full ensemble?” indicates whether the metric considers the full ensemble
orjust the ensemble mean.
Metric Coord- Full Range and
averaged? ensemble? optimal value
Mean Euclidean distance [0,∞) km; 0 km
Median Euclidean distance [0,∞) km; 0 km
RMS Euclidean distance [0,∞) km; 0 km
Mean absolute bias ✓ [0,∞) km; 0 km
Reliability ✓ [0,∞) km2; 0 km2
CRPS ✓ ✓ [0,∞) km; 0 km
SSREL ✓ ✓ [0,∞) km; 0 km
SSRAT ✓ ✓ [0,∞); 1
DTMF ✓ ✓ [0, 1]; 1
RHD ✓ ✓ ≥ 0; 0
28
4. Results of hyperparameter experiment
Figure 6: CNN performance on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical systems), with
respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected (best overall)
model, while the star marks the best model according to the evaluation metric shown in the given
panel. [a] Mean Euclidean distance for CNNs trained with Gaussian distribution of first-guess
errors. [b] Same but for uniform distribution. [c] SSRAT for CNNs trained with Gaussian
distribution of first-guess errors. [d] Same but for uniform distribution.
29
ThissectionevaluatestheCNNsonallsystems(bothtropicalandnon-tropical)inthevalidation
data, with the aim of selecting the best CNN. The validation data contain 1141 original TC
samples; we create 8 random first guesses for each sample (following the procedure in Section 3b
with Gaussian whole-track error), yielding a final sample size of 9128. Results for two evaluation
metrics(meanEuclideandistanceandSSRAT)areshowninFigure6;otherevaluationmetricsare
shown in Supplemental Section 3. We summarize the results below:
1. Thereisatrade-offbetweenthequalityofdeterministicpredictionsandensemblecalibration.
Forexample,trainingwithGaussianfirst-guesserrorsandalongvideosequence(correspond-
ing to the top half of Figure 6a or 6c) leads to the worst Euclidean errors but the best values
of SSREL, SSRAT, and RHD.
2. There is no obvious relationship between model performance and a single hyperparameter.
Forexample,inFigure6a(correspondingtomodelstrainedwithGaussianfirst-guesserrors),
model performance generally deteriorates with video length. However, in Figure 6b (cor-
responding to models trained with uniform first-guess errors), model performance generally
improves with video length.
3. There is no clear optimum for domain size. For some metrics the best value is achieved with
the largest domain (1200× 1200 km), while for others the best value is achieved with the
smallest domain (600× 600 km).
4. There is no clear optimum for video length, except that the best value for all metrics is
achieved with a video length> 1. This suggests that the temporal evolution of the TC’s
satellite presentation – not just a single image – is important.
5. Overall, training with a uniform distribution of first-guess errors does not aid model perfor-
mance.
Based on all ten metrics, we select the CNN with a 600-by-600-km domain size, animation
length of 9 lag times (back to 240 min ago), and trained with uniform first-guess errors – marked
by circles in Figure 6. The exact scores achieved by this model are listed in Table 9.
30
Table 9: Results on validation data for selected CNN. All ranks are out of 56. For all evaluation
metrics, 1 is the best rank and 56 is the worst.
Evaluation metric Exact value Rank
Mean Euclidean distance 28.1 km 5th
Median Euclidean distance 23.8 km 5th
RMS Euclidean distance 34.0 km 7th
Mean absolute bias 1.57 km 47th
Reliability 26.5 km2 31st
CRPS 13.0 km 5th
SSREL 3.40 km 22nd
SSRAT 0.85 25th
DTMF 1.00 Tied for 1st
RHD 0.0055 30th
5. Evaluation of final ensemble
Here we evaluate the final ensemble of center-fixing models, henceforth “GeoCenter”. The
ensemble consists of several CNNs – all using IR imagery with a domain size of 600× 600 km,
an IR animation with 9 lag times, and trained with a uniform distribution of first-guess errors.
By experimental design, the ensemble should contain four CNNs, each using a different set of IR
wavelengths(Table6). However,theCNNtrainedwithwavelengths {3.9, 6.185, 6.95}𝜇machieved
poor performance, for reasons that are unclear. (We suspect that this model failed to converge due
torandomfactors,suchastherandomseedusedtoinitializemodelweights.) Theinclusionofthis
31
CNN substantially degrades the performance of the ensemble; thus, the final GeoCenter ensemble
contains only the other three CNNs, leading to a total ensemble size of 150 instead of 200.
The first subsection below evaluates GeoCenter objectively, based on all tropical systems in the
testing dataset (for which the “tropical flag” defined in Table 3 is 1), using Gaussian first-guess
errors. Foranalogousresultsonthecompletetestingsetandonnon-tropicalsystemsinthetesting
set,seeSupplementalSection4. Thesecondsubsectionpresentscasestudiesforadeeperbutmore
subjective understanding of GeoCenter.
a. Objective evaluation
Tropical systems in the testing data comprise 854 original samples (82.4% of the testing data);
we create 8 random first guesses for each, yielding a final sample size of 6832.
32
Figure 7: Performance of GeoCenter ensemble mean on tropical systems in testing data. [a]
Attributes diagram for image-center-relative𝑥-coordinate. The blue shading marks the
positive-skill area, where MSE skill score> 0; the dashed 1:1 line is the perfect reliability curve;
the red curve is the reliability curve achieved by GeoCenter; and the inset histograms show the
distribution of predictions (GeoCenter ensemble means) and observations. [b] Same but for
image-center-relative 𝑦-coordinate. [c] Same but for total correction distance. [d] Heat map of
errors. [e] Histogram of Euclidean distance errors.
Figure 7 evaluates the GeoCenter ensemble mean. The attributes diagram for the𝑥-coordinate
(Figure7a)showsthat,whileintermediatepredictionsarenearlyunbiased,extremepredictionsare
not extreme enough. Specifically, predictions≲ -80 km are too high (not negative enough), while
predictions ≳ +80 km are too low (not positive enough). In other words, when GeoCenter makes
an extreme correction to the west/east, it should correct even more to the west/east. Similarly,
the attributes diagram for the𝑦-coordinate (Figure 7b) shows that predictions≳ +80 km are not
positive enough. In other words, when GeoCenter makes an extreme correction to the north, it
should correct even more to the north. The attributes diagram for total correction distance (Figure
7c) shows that GeoCenter has a negative bias for correction distances≲ 60 km and positive bias
for correction distances≳ 60 km. In other words, when GeoCenter makes a small correction,
33
the correction is systematically too small (by up to 10 km); and when GeoCenter makes a large
correction, the correction is systematically too large (by up to 5 km). Despite the shortcomings
mentioned, all reliability curves (Figures 7a-c) lie close to the 1:1 line and almost entirely within
thepositive-skillarea,leadingtoapositiveMSEskillscore. Theerrorheatmap(Figure7d)shows
that GeoCenter has a bias of 0.7 km too far west and 0.6 km too far south; these biases are very
small compared with the inherent uncertainty in FBT labels. Also, by comparison to Figure 5a –
showing many errors well above 50 km – GeoCenter improves much of the error in the first-guess
center fix. The histogram of Euclidean distance errors (Figure 7e) shows that the model has a
mean error of 24.7 km and median of 20.8 km. Analogous GeoCenter results for non-tropical
systems are 35.4 and 30.7 km, respectively; analogues for the complete testing set (tropical and
non-tropical) are 26.6 and 22.2 km, respectively.
34
Figure 8: Performance of GeoCenter uncertainty estimates on tropical systems in testing data. [a]
Spread-skill plot for image-center-relative𝑥-coordinate. The background histogram shows the
distribution of GeoCenter spread values; the 1:1 line is the perfect spread-skill curve; the orange
curve is the spread-skill curve achieved by GeoCenter; and the inset plot shows bias (mean
prediction minus mean target) as a function of spread. [b] Same but for image-center-relative
𝑦-coordinate. [c] Same but for full correction vector. Values shown here are Euclidean: root
mean squared distance (RMSD) instead of RMSE, EESD (Equation 1) instead of scalar standard
deviation. [d] Discard test for image-center-relative𝑥-coordinate. The inset plot shows bias
(mean prediction minus mean target) as a function of discard fraction. For a higher discard
fraction (lower uncertainty threshold), the mean uncertainty of the remaining samples is lower.
[e] Same but for image-center-relative𝑦-coordinate. [f] Same but for full correction vector. [g]
Rank histogram for image-center-relative𝑥-coordinate. The dashed line is the perfect rank
histogram. The horizontal axis is the rank achieved by the observation within the ensemble
distribution; 0 = below all ensemble members, and 150 = above all ensemble members. [h] Same
but for image-center-relative𝑦-coordinate. [i] Same but for total correction distance.
35
Figure 8 evaluates the full GeoCenter ensemble, including uncertainty estimates. The spread-
skill plots (Figures 8a-c) show that GeoCenter is slightly underconfident, producing more spread
than it should. Also, GeoCenter is more underconfident when producing small spread values (≲
15 km for𝑥, ≲ 20 km for𝑦, ≲ 25 km for the full vector) than when producing large spread values.
However, acrossallthreequantities,theoverallSSRAT(seepaneltitles)rangesfrom0.99to1.06,
very close to the ideal value of 1.0. Discard tests (Figures 8d-f) show that whenever a higher
percentage of the most uncertain data samples is thrown out, model error for all three quantities
decreases. Inanoperationalsetting,thispropertycouldbeusefulasan“ignore”flag. Forexample,
if the maximum acceptable distance error is 22 km – which corresponds to a discard fraction of
∼0.2 (see Figure 8f) and EESD of 36.4 km (not shown in Figure 8f) – forecasters could choose
to ignore GeoCenter whenever its EESD> 36.4 km. Rank histograms show that the GeoCenter
ensemble is almost perfectly calibrated for the𝑥- and 𝑦-coordinates (Figures 8g-h), with a mean
deviation of 0.001 from the optimal histogram, which has a uniform frequency of1
151 = 0.0066.
However, rank histograms for the𝑦-coordinate and total correction distance (Figures 8h-i) show
thatGeoCenterisslightlyoverdispersive,whichisconsistentwithanSSRAT >1.0(Figures8b-c).
For example, the overdispersion for𝑦 manifests primarily as a negative bias, corresponding to the
high frequency for ranks of∼55 to 135 in the 150-member ensemble, along with a low frequency
for other ranks. In other words, the𝑦-coordinate of the true TC center falls within the ranks 55
to 135 – mostly above the ensemble median (75.5) – more often than it should. Lastly, for total
correctiondistance,theoverdispersionmanifestsprimarilyasalowfrequencyofranks ≲35and ≳
140. Inotherwords,thetotalcorrectiondistanceneededfallsontheextremeendsoftheGeoCenter
distribution less often than it should.
36
Figure 9: Performance of GeoCenter on tropical systems in testing data, as a function of TC
intensity and true TC-center latitude. The three intensity bins correspond to
sub-hurricane-strength, category-1 hurricane, and category-2–5 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson
scale. In each panel, the top row averages over all latitudes, so is a function of intensity only; and
the rightmost column averages over all intensities, so is a function of latitude only. [a] Mean
Euclidean distance error. [b] Median Euclidean distance. [c] RMS Euclidean distance. [d] Bias
for 𝑥-coordinate (GeoCenter minus truth). [e] Bias for𝑦-coordinate (GeoCenter minus truth). [f]
Number of TC samples in each bin.
Figure9breaksdownGeoCenterperformancebybothTCintensityandlatitude. Forallmetrics
based on Euclidean distance (Figures 9a-c), we note three patterns. First, error decreases with
TC intensity, reaching a maximum for sub-hurricane-strength storms (intensity< 64 kt) and a
minimumforcategory-2–5hurricanes 6 (intensity≥83kt). ThisbehaviourissimilartoARCHER-
2, which also shows larger error for weak systems. Second, error reaches a minimum at 25-35◦N
6This division of intensities – into three broad categories instead of seven fine categories (depression, storm, categories 1-5) – is partly
motivated by small sample size in some of the fine categories. For example, categories 2-5 include only 96 samples in category 5. Furthermore,
these 96 samples come from only 12 original samples, each with 8 first guesses.
37
and increases while moving equatorward. This is because low-latitude TCs are often at an early
stage in their life cycle and therefore less organized. Third, error also increases while moving
polewardfrom25-35◦N.Thisisbecausehigh-latitudeTCsoftenbecomeextratropicalordissipate;
these systems include complicated structures that make center-fixing difficult (Wang et al. 2020).
Again, ARCHER-2 has similar behaviour for high-latitude systems.
For bias in the𝑥- and𝑦-coordinates (Figures 9d-e), we again note three patterns. First, extreme
biases generally occur at high latitudes. Second, extreme biases in𝑥 are mostly positive (too far
east), while extreme biases in𝑦 are mostly negative (too far south). Third, extreme biases at high
latitude are typically worse for weaker TCs, although this pattern may be unduly affected by small
sample size. For example, the bins at latitude≥ 45◦N contain no more than 24 TC samples each
(Figure 9f). Furthermore, these 24 samples come from only 3 original samples, each with 8 first
guesses.
Table 10 breaks down GeoCenter performance by ocean basin, showing that the EP basin has
the lowest error. We believe that this is because [1] EP storms reach high latitudes less often; [2]
EP storms recurve less often, leading to smaller acceleration vectors and therefore greater time
continuityintheTClocation. Also,Table10suggeststhatbiasesintheoveralldataset(Figure7d)
are driven largely by the AL basin.
Table 10: Performance of GeoCenter on tropical systems in testing data, as a function of basin.
Basin
Evaluation metric AL EP WP
Mean Euclidean distance (km) 24.9 20.7 27.3
Median Euclidean distance (km) 21.0 18.4 23.0
RMS Euclidean distance (km) 29.9 24.4 33.2
Bias in𝑥-coordinate (km) -2.32 +0.10 +0.29
Bias in𝑦-coordinate (km) -1.51 -1.96 +1.09
38
Figure 10: Performance of GeoCenter on tropical systems in testing data, as a function of
nadir-relative position. In each panel, the top row averages over meridional distances, so is a
function of zonal distance only; and the rightmost column averages over all zonal distances, so is
a function of meridional distance only. [a] Mean Euclidean distance error. [b] Median Euclidean
distance. [c] RMS Euclidean distance. [d] Bias for𝑥-coordinate (GeoCenter minus truth). [e]
Bias for𝑦-coordinate (GeoCenter minus truth). [f] Number of TC samples in each bin.
Figure 10 breaks down GeoCenter performance by position relative to nadir,i.e., the satellite
subpoint. Satellites register off-nadir clouds with a parallax error, which increases with distance
from nadir and can beO(10 km). For clouds north/east/west of nadir, the satellite registers cloud
positionasfarthernorth/east/westthanitactuallyis,respectively. Thus,forTCseast/westofnadir,
we expect a positive/negative bias in GeoCenter’s𝑥-coordinate; and for TCs north of nadir, we
expect a positive bias in GeoCenter’s𝑦-coordinate. For the metrics based on Euclidean distance
(Figures 10a-c), we note two patterns. First, error generally increases with the absolute zonal
distance from nadir, as can be seen in the top row of each panel. Second, in terms of meridional
distance from nadir (𝜙nadir), error is actually worst for the smallest off-nadir distances. To explain
this pattern, we first note that because all three satellites are located at 0◦N, there is a unique
relationbetween 𝜙nadir andlatitude( Φ). Thus,highererrorsat 𝜙nadir < 1500km(Φ < 13.5◦N)can
be explained by the higher errors near the equator noted in Figure 9, associated with disorganized
TCs. For GeoCenter’s𝑥-coordinate, biases east/west of nadir are generally positive/negative (see
top row of Figure 10d), as hypothesized above. For GeoCenter’s𝑦-coordinate, the magnitude of
the bias generally increases with𝜙nadir (see rightmost column of Figure 10e).
39
Table 11 breaks down GeoCenter performance by daytime (when𝛼 > 0◦, 𝛼 being the solar
altitude angle at the TC center) vs. nighttime (when𝛼 < 0◦). We perform this analysis partly due
to concerns about the inclusion of the 3.9-𝜇m channel in our predictors, which behaves differently
during the day, when it receives energy reflected from the Sun, versus during the night, when it
does not (Kim and Hong 2019; Kim et al. 2019). However, GeoCenter does not appear to be
severely affected by this difference in behaviour; its daytime and nighttime performance are very
similar, with no metric differing by more than 1.53 km.
Table 11: Performance of GeoCenter on tropical systems in testing data, divided by time of day.
Time
Evaluation metric Day Night
Mean Euclidean distance (km) 24.9 24.6
Median Euclidean distance (km) 21.0 20.4
RMS Euclidean distance (km) 30.0 29.9
Bias in𝑥-coordinate (km) -1.09 -0.21
Bias in𝑦-coordinate (km) -1.32 +0.21
Figures 11a-b compare GeoCenter with other center-fixing algorithms, focusing on the opera-
tional ARCHER-2 and recent deep-learning efforts. For ARCHER-2, we take results from Table 3
of WV16; for the other algorithms, we use Table 1 of Smith and Tuomi (2021, ST21), Table 2 of
Wangetal.(2019,W19),Section3.2ofYangetal.(2019,Y19),andTable3andFigure8ofWang
andLi(2023,W23). Becausethesestudiesfilternon-tropicalsystemsoutofthedatasettovarying
degrees7,weincludeGeoCenterresultsontwoversionsofthetestingdata: allsystems(worst-case
estimate) and tropical systems only (best-case estimate). However, the comparisons in Figures
11a-b are still not apples-to-apples for several reasons, the main one being that each study has a
7Y19 use typhoons only; WV16 exclude systems over land and poleward of 40◦, many of which are non-tropical; ST21 exclude systems with
a minimum central pressure> 1005 hPa, many of which are non-tropical. W19 and W23 do not mention any filtering of their datasets.
40
different testing dataset. Thus, the purpose of Figures 11a-b is to show that GeoCenter is at least
on par with other center-fixing guidance, not to claim conclusively that GeoCenter outperforms
any other method. However, GeoCenter has several advantages over other methods that are not
conveyed by Figures 11a-b; see Section 1e.
Figure 11: Error comparison.
“ARCHER-2: IR” = ARCHER-2 applied to longwave IR data. “ARCHER-2: SWIR” =
ARCHER-2 applied to shortwave IR data, which leads to better ARCHER-2 performance than
longwave IR. “ARCHER-2: ASCAT” = ARCHER-2 applied to scatterometer data, which leads to
better ARCHER-2 performance thanany other data type. “GeoCenter: tropical” = GeoCenter on
tropical systems only; “GeoCenter: all sys” = GeoCenter on all systems.
ST21 = Smith and Tuomi (2021); W19 = Wang et al. (2019); Y19 = Yang et al. (2019); W23 =
Wang and Li (2023).
Error bars for GeoCenter indicate a 95% confidence interval, based on 1000 iterations of
bootstrapping. Black-outlined boxes for W19 and W23 (panel a only) indicate a range over
multiple intensity categories, because these articles split intensity into smaller bins.
41
Figure 11c compares GeoCenter only to different versions of ARCHER-2. When considering
allstorms(rightmostgrouping)andsub-hurricane-strengthstorms(leftmostgrouping),GeoCenter
performs best. When considering another intensity category, GeoCenter performs second-best,
beaten only by “ARCHER-2: microwave” or “ARCHER-2: ASCAT”. However, these versions
of ARCHER-2 depend on data that are often unavailable, whereas GeoCenter depends only on
routinely available geostationary data. Comparing to the versions of ARCHER-2 that use geosta-
tionary data (IR, SWIR, or visible), GeoCenter outperforms ARCHER-2 by at least 8 km in every
intensity category.
b. Homogeneous comparison with ARCHER-2
We perform a homogeneous comparison between GeoCenter and ARCHER-2, using the same
TC samples to evaluate both models. Specifically, we use 17 TCs from the 2024 season.8 We
obtain ARCHER-2 estimates from ATCF A-deck files provided by the Cooperative Institute for
Meteorological Satellite Studies (CIMMS).9
We run GeoCenter for every TC every 10 min, using a short-term forecast as the first guess,
henceforth“shorttrack”. Inotherwords,ratherthanthedata-augmentationproceduredescribedin
Section 3b, we create a first guess using data available in real-time operations. We initialize a new
short-track forecast every 6 hours. For every initialization time𝑡0, we create a 36-hour track with
valid times𝑡0− 24 hours, 𝑡0− 18 hours, . . ., 𝑡0+ 12 hours. For points before𝑡0, we use the CARQ
(combinedautomatedresponsetoquery)lineintheoperationalATCFA-deckfile. Forpointsafter
𝑡0, we draw A-deck data from the following priority list (using the𝑛th source only if the[𝑛− 1]th
source is unavailable):
1. The official track forecast (labeled “OFCL” or “OFCI” for the AL/EP basins, “JTWC” or
“JTWI” for the WP basin).
2. A model forecast – namely the Trajectory and Beta (TAB) model for the AL/EP basins, or
Beta and Advection Model (BAM) for the WP basin (DeMaria et al. 2022).
3. Linear interpolation.
8The randomly selected TCs are AL09-AL15, AL90-91, AL93, EP10-11, EP96, EP99, WP18-19, and WP21. This dataset is small because
the analysis is performed on a local CIRA machine, which obviates the need for complicated data-transferring to a supercomputer but limits the
computing power available for analysis.
9Available at https://tropic.ssec.wisc.edu/real-time/archerOnline/cyclones. For example, the F-deck for AL142024 is
available athttps://tropic.ssec.wisc.edu/real-time/archerOnline/cyclones/2024_14L/web/archer_fdeck.txt.
42
After creating the 36-hour track, we interpolate the data from 6-hour to 1-second time steps, so
thatshort-trackforecastscanbematchedwithanARCHER-2orGeoCenterpredictionatanytime.
We use the following procedure to match ARCHER-2 predictions, GeoCenter predictions, and
truth labels for one TC:
1. We match every ARCHER-2 prediction (ˆ𝑌A2) to the nearest GeoCenter prediction in time
( ˆ𝑌GC), as long asˆ𝑌GC is within 30 min ofˆ𝑌A2. If there is no GeoCenter prediction within 30
min of ˆ𝑌A2, then ˆ𝑌A2 is removed from the dataset.
2. To obtain the truth label for an ARCHER-2 prediction valid at time𝑡, we interpolate the FBT
data to time𝑡.
3. To obtain the truth label for a GeoCenter prediction valid at time𝑡, we do the same.
Notethattwomatchedpredictions– ˆ𝑌A2and ˆ𝑌GC– generallyhavedifferenttruthlabels,because ˆ𝑌A2
and ˆ𝑌GCgenerallyoccuratdifferenttimes. WhileGeoCenterpredictionsareavailableevery10min
at times divisible by 10 min (0000 UTC, 0010 UTC, 0020 UTC, etc.), ARCHER-2 predictions are
typicallyavailableattimes notdivisibleby10min,duetotheirregularoverpassesofpolar-orbiting
satellites that provide input data for ARCHER-2.
After the matching procedure, we have 278 TC samples, each with an ARCHER-2 prediction
and a GeoCenter prediction. Every ARCHER-2 prediction in this dataset is based on microwave
data.10 ThehomogeneouserrorcomparisonisshowninFigure12. Intermsofcoordinate-averaged
absolutebias,ARCHER-2outperformsGeoCenter,andthedifferenceissignificantatthe95%level
(based on a paired bootstrapping test with 1000 iterations). In terms of the other three metrics,
GeoCenter outperforms ARCHER-2, although the difference is not significant at the 95% level.
Remaining metrics in Table 8 are not reported here, because reliability requires a larger sample
size (due to the use of binning in the calculation procedure, which further subdivides the sample
size) and the others (CRPS, SSREL, SSRAT, DTMF, RHD) require more uncertainty information
than is provided by ARCHER-2.
Overall,GeoCenterperformscompetitivelywiththemicrowave(best-case)versionofARCHER-
2, while providing an updated estimate every 10 min.
10The F-decks contain only predictions based on microwave data or an unknown source (“UNKN”); we remove the latter from our dataset.
43
Figure 12: Homogeneous comparison between GeoCenter and the microwave version of
ARCHER-2. Error bars indicate a 95% confidence interval, based on 1000 iterations of
bootstrapping.
c. Case studies
Here we investigate four case studies from the testing data. To save space, every figure in this
section shows a 3-D slice of the IR predictors: all channels at the 0-min lag time. Furthermore,
every figure shows one random first guess for one TC sample. For every case study, Supplemental
44
Section4cshowsananalogousfigure,containingonlya2-DsliceoftheIRpredictors(the8.5- 𝜇m
channel at the 0-min lag time) but all eight random first guesses. To determine which of the eight
first guesses to show here in the main text, we choose a representative example, with GeoCenter
error close to the median over all eight first guesses.
The first case study (Figure 13) is a low-intensity TC (Dujuan; WP012021) at low latitude,
identified in Figure 9 as a trouble area for GeoCenter. Dujuan contains several areas of deep
convection with no obvious circulation center; also, the true TC center (black star in Figure 13) is
in a region of small brightness-temperature gradients. The GeoCenter ensemble (green contours)
places the TC center southeast of the image center (red square), but it is actually due south of
the image center. The Euclidean distance error is 47.5 km, and the true TC center lies on the
third-to-outermostprobabilitycontour,indicatingthatGeoCenterassignsasmallprobabilitytothe
correct location. Supplemental Figure S18 shows that all eight first guesses for this TC sample –
not just the one shown in Figure 13 – result in large GeoCenter errors.
45
Figure 13: Case study: Tropical Depression Dujuan/Auring (WP012021), with an intensity of 35
kt at 0600 UTC 21 Feb 2021. Each panel shows the brightness temperature at a different IR
channel, along with probability contours representing estimated TC-center locations from the 150
members of the GeoCenter ensemble. Darker greens correspond to higher GeoCenter
probabilities, and the green circle inside the innermost contour is the GeoCenter ensemble mean.
All probabilities are quite low (see colour bar), because they are per-pixel probabilities; there is a
large number of pixels (3002); and the sum over all pixels must be 100%. The red square is the
image center, and the black star is the true TC center. The title of panel j gives the error of the
ensemble mean (𝑥-coordinate, 𝑦-coordinate, and Euclidean) and the standard deviation of the
ensemble members,i.e., the spread.
46
The second case study (Figure 14) is a high-intensity TC (Chanthu; WP192021), identified in
Figure 9 as a strong point of GeoCenter. Chanthu has a classic (albeit somewhat overcast) eye
signature,andGeoCentercorrectsmostofthelargefirst-guesserror,achievingaEuclideandistance
error of 13.8 km. Supplemental Figure S19 shows that this is not a fluke; the average error across
the eight first guesses is 15.6 km.
Figure 14: Case study: Super Typhoon Chanthu/Kiko (WP192021), with an intensity of 145 kt at
0000 UTC 11 Sep 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 13.
47
The third case study (Figure 15) is a tropical depression (Fred; AL062021), with aircraft recon-
naissance likely making the “true” FBT center highly accurate. There are several blobs of deep
convection surrounding a relatively dry central area, which is quite expansive and does not have
an obvious elliptical or spiral shape. Despite these issues, GeoCenter is fairly accurate, with a
Euclidean distance error of 25.9 km (average of 28.9 km for all first guesses; see Supplemental
Figure S20). This case study is just one example of GeoCenter performing well on a weak system
with ambiguous structure.
48
Figure 15: Case study: Tropical Depression Fred (AL062021), with an intensity of 30 kt at 0000
UTC 13 Aug 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 13.
The fourth case study (Figure 16) is a storm that underwent extratropical transition four days
prior(Odette;AL152021). Despiteitshighlyasymmetricsatellitepresentation,GeoCenterlocates
the center of Odette quite accurately, with a Euclidean error of 15.1 km. GeoCenter’s success for
this case might be attributable11 to the spiral cloud bands still present south and northeast of the
11A more confident attribution could be possible with explainable artificial intelligence, which is a subject of future research for GeoCenter.
49
circulation center, which are most visible in panels a, e, and g-i. Supplemental Figure S21 shows
that the mean error over all eight first guesses is 16.1 km.
Figure 16: Case study: extratropical remnants of Tropical Storm Odette (AL152021) at 0600
UTC 22 Sep 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 13.
ThecasestudiesforFredandOdette– aswellasNewton(SupplementalFigureS22),adifferent
kind of remnant system – show that GeoCenter often performs well on complicated systems, not
50
just major hurricanes with cloud-free eyes. However, we do not claim that GeoCenter always
handles complicated systems well, as demonstrated by the Dujuan case study (Figure 13).
6. Additional analyses
Additional analyses, relegated to the Supplement for the sake of brevity, are discussed briefly
here. InSupplementalSection5wecompareGeoCenterwithandwithoutbiascorrection,showing
thatbiascorrectionsoundlyimprovestheperformanceofboththeensemblemeananduncertainty
estimates. In Supplemental Section 6 we compare GeoCenter with and without ATCF predic-
tors, showing that although the ATCF predictors lead to a notable improvement in performance,
GeoCenter-no-ATCF is still competitive with the IR/SWIR versions of ARCHER-2. Hence,
GeoCenter-no-ATCF could be used as a backup model in cases where ATCF data are unavailable.
InSupplementalSection7weranktheimportanceofIRchannels,showingthatthebestindividual
wavelength appears to be 8.5 or 9.61𝜇m. However, no 1-channel CNN performs as well as the
3-channel CNNs making up the final GeoCenter ensemble. Finally, in Supplemental Section 8
we analyze the sensitivity of GeoCenter to the magnitude of the first-guess error. We show that
although GeoCenter error with increases with first-guess error, GeoCenter remains competitive
with the IR/SWIR versions of ARCHER-2 at first-guess errors up to 120 km.
7. Summary and future work
Center-fixing is a critical first step in the TC-forecasting process, with current and future esti-
mates of TC properties being highly sensitive to this initial location estimate. Operational centres
often rely on the subjective Dvorak technique, with ARCHER-2 being the only objective method
used in operations. ARCHER-2’s best-case performance is achieved when using microwave or
scatterometer data, which are typically available twice a day or less for a given TC. ARCHER-2
performsmuchworsewhenusingroutinelyavailableIRdata– collectedbygeostationarysatellites
duringbothdayandnight,at10–15-minresolutionand <10-minlatency,acrossallTCbasins. Pre-
liminary results show that GeoCenter (the algorithm developed herein), which uses only routinely
available IR data, performs similarly to the best-case ARCHER-2 (with microwave/scatterometer
data) and greatly outperforms the worst-case ARCHER-2 (with IR data).
51
GeoCenter is a deep-learning algorithm, specifically an ensemble of CNNs, trained with multi-
spectral animations of IR data. Our hyperparameter experiment shows that CNNs perform better
when trained with an animation (time series) than a single image. The predictors include nine
IR channels at nine lag times – 0, 30,. . ., 240 minutes before the valid time𝑡0 – centered at a
first-guess location which is randomly offset from the true TC center at𝑡0. GeoCenter’s task is to
correct this random offset, which averages 48 km and can exceed 100 km, and find the true center.
GeoCenteristrainedondatafromthreeoceanbasins– theAL,EP,andWP– representingthevast
majority of northern-hemisphere TCs. GeoCenter is also trained with data across the full lifetime
of every TC, which includes post-/sub-/extra-tropical systems. These properties – combined with
GeoCenterbeingtrainedonroutinelyavailableIRdata– makeGeoCenterapotentiallyoperational
toolwithwideapplicability. Furthermore,GeoCenterperformsskillfuluncertaintyquantification,
providing a well calibrated ensemble of 150 possible TC centers.
The objective evaluation of GeoCenter – on an independent testing set – focuses mainly on
tropicalsystems, whichcomprisethemajority(82.4%) ofthedataset. GeoCenterachievesasmall
bias – 0.7 km to the west and 0.6 km to the south – with mean/median/RMS Euclidean errors
of 24.7/20.8/30.0 km. GeoCenter errors vary strongly with TC intensity (similar to ARCHER-2),
reaching a maximum of 28.1/24.5/33.4 km for sub-hurricane-strength TCs and a minimum of
14.6/12.5/17.3 km for category-2–5 hurricanes. Errors also vary somewhat with ocean basin,
reachingamaximumof27.3/23.0/33.2kmfortheWPandaminimumof20.7/18.4/24.4kmforthe
EP.GeoCenterprovidesskillfulestimatesofitsownuncertainty,withaspread-skillratioof0.99to
1.06 (close to the ideal value of 1.0), a monotonic decrease shown in discard tests (indicating that
model uncertainty is perfectly rank-correlated with model error), and nearly flat rank histograms.
ThefollowingscenariosarestillchallengingforGeoCenter: (1)extremelylargeoffsetsbetweenthe
first-guess and true TC center, which are not corrected enough by GeoCenter; (2) weak TCs near
the equator, which are often developing systems without a well defined center; (3) high-latitude
TCs, which are often interacting with mid-latitude weather systems; and (4) TCs far from the
satellite subpoint,i.e., with a large parallax shift. Nonetheless, GeoCenter performs competitively
withARCHER-2microwave-basedestimatesandothercenter-fixingalgorithms,whichareknown
to have many of the same challenges.
52
We provide several case studies, which (1) show how GeoCenter output might be visualized
in operations; (2) demonstrate successes and failures of GeoCenter. Most importantly, we show
that GeoCenter performs well not just for strong hurricanes, but for a wide variety of systems.
GeoCenter often performs well on TCs with a central dense overcast, sheared TCs undergoing
extratropical transition, extratropical systems, and remnant lows.
Futureworkincludesthefollowingitems. First,wewillincorporatedaytimevisibleimageryand
nighttime synthetic visible imagery [ProxyVis;][](Chirokova et al. 2023) into GeoCenter, which
may further improve its performance. Second, we will investigate whether enforcing a notion
of temporal consistency –i.e., a reasonable movement of the estimated TC center over time –
can improve GeoCenter accuracy. Third, we will create an operational prototype that provides
estimates for real-time TCs. We will run GeoCenter whenever new IR data become available
(every 10 min). For example, to center-fix a storm at 1200 UTC, the IR predictor times will be
{0800, 0830, 0900, . . ., 1200} UTC. If the next valid time is 1210 UTC, the new IR predictor
times will be{0810, 0840, 0910,. . ., 1210} UTC. Fourth, we will expand GeoCenter by training
on southern-hemisphere storms and other geostationary satellites that have similar IR bands to
the GOES ABI and Himawari AHI – namely the Geo-Kompsat-2A AMI and Meteosat Third
Generation FCI. Fifth, we are considering developing a special version of GeoCenter for the
Meteosat Second Generation imager, which does not have similar IR bands but is the only GEO
satellite providing data over the Indian Ocean. The fourth and fifth items would make GeoCenter
truly global by expanding its coverage to all TC basins.
53
Acknowledgments. ThisworkwassupportedbyNOAAAwardNumberNA19OAR4320073. All
computing was performed on NOAA’s Hera supercomputer.
Data availability statement. A-deck files and final best tracks for the North Atlantic (AL),
eastern North Pacific (EP), and central North Pacific (CP) basins are available from the
NHC at https://ftp.nhc.noaa.gov/atcf/. Final best tracks for the western North Pa-
cific (WP), Indian Ocean (IO), and southern hemisphere (SH) are available from the JWTC at
https://www.metoc.navy.mil/jtwc/jtwc.html?best-tracks. A-decks for these basins
are not publicly available; they were used by permission from the JTWC for this research, un-
der the condition that they are not redistributed. IR satellite imagery from the GOES-16/17/18
ABI (Himawari-8/9 AHI) is available from NOAA at https://registry.opendata.aws/
noaa-goes/ (https://registry.opendata.aws/noaa-himawari/). All code used for this study, in-
cluding pre-processing of input data and training/evaluation of CNN models, is contained in a
Python library calledml4tccf, available athttps://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15116854.
The trained models comprising GeoCenter (four CNNs and four isotonic-regression models), as
wellfilesneededforpre-processingdata(normalizationparametersbasedonthetrainingdata),are
available athttps://zenodo.org/records/15116855.
APPENDIX A
CNN details
For a thorough background on CNNs tailored to environmental scientists, see Lagerquist et al.
(2020). This section describes our adaptation of the temporal U-net architecture developed by
Chiu et al. (2020, henceforth C20), shown in Figure 3.
We modify the C20 architecture in three crucial ways. First, because our outputs are scalars
rather than a gridded image, we replace the U-net backbone with a CNN backbone. The U-net
backbone includes decoder layers to convert the features detected by convolutional layers into an
output image, while the CNN backbone includes fully connected layers (orange arrows in Figure
3)toconvertsaidfeaturesintoscalaroutputs. Second,weusetime-distributedconvolution,where
theweightsineachconvolutionalfilteraresharedacrosslagtimes(Murigaetal.2023;Nigamand
Srivastava2023). For example, in thecolumn markedA (B)in Figure3, eachconvolutional layer
contains20(40)filterswiththesameweightsacrosstheninelagtimes. Thus,eachfilterisapplied
54
identically to all lag times, detecting the same spatial features at each lag time. The approach of
C20, on the other hand, is to use a different set of filters for each lag time. Our time-distributed
approach reduces the number of CNN parameters to learn, which reduces computational demand
and therisk ofoverfitting. Also, ourtime-distributed approachis physicallymotivated, as features
that help locate the TC center (e.g., a clear eye, spiral rain bands, etc.) do not change ingeneral
appearance over time. Thus, the same convolutional filters should be able to detect these features
at different lag times. Said features do change inspecific appearance (e.g., intensity and location
within the image) over time; these temporal changes are captured by the temporal convolution
showninFigure3(calledthe“forecastingmodule”inC20). Third,ourCNNsperformuncertainty
quantification, as discussed in Section 3c.
APPENDIX B
Details on uncertainty quantification
For a thorough background on machine-learned uncertainty quantification (ML-UQ) tailored to
environmentalscientists,seeHaynesetal.(2023,henceforthH23). Tocapturealeatoryuncertainty,
we use the CRPS method, which performed best for this purpose in the experiments of H23.
Whereasthetraditionaldeterministicapproachistoprovideoneestimatethatminimizesthemean
squarederror,theCRPSapproachistoprovideanensembleofestimatesthatminimizestheCRPS.
In other words, the CRPS is the loss function:
CRPS= 1
𝑁
𝑁∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝑜true− 𝑜𝑖
est|− 1
2
1
𝑁 2
𝑁∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑁∑︁
𝑗=1
|𝑜𝑖
est− 𝑜 𝑗
est|, (B1)
where 𝑁= 50 is the ensemble size;𝑜true is the true value; and𝑜𝑘
est is the estimate from the𝑘th
ensemble member. The CRPS is negatively oriented with an optimal value of 0.0. The first term
is the classic mean absolute error (MAE) for the ensemble average, and the second term is the
mean absolute pairwise difference (MAPD) among ensemble members. We apply Equation B1
separately to both coordinates of the translation vector (Section 3b) – namelyΔ𝑟 andΔ𝑐 – and
take the average of the two values as our CNN loss.
To capture epistemic uncertainty, we use the MME method. Specifically, we train four CNNs,
eachwithadifferentsetofIRchannels,asdiscussedinSection3c. Althoughweintroducedifferent
55
predictorsetsoutofnecessity,thisbringsanadditionaladvantage,namelythatitincreasesensemble
diversity. Training each CNN in the ensemble with different predictors makes the CNNs more
independent of each other,i.e., their error sources and failure modes are less likely to be aligned.
See Bourel et al. (2024) and references therein for a discussion of ensemble diversity.
APPENDIX C
Details on isotonic regression
Biascorrectionisacommonapplicationforisotonicregression;themodelbeingcorrected(here,
aCNN)iscalledthe“basemodel”. Foreachtargetvariable 𝑧,isotonicregressioncreatesamapping
(or“lookuptable”) 𝑧𝑖→ 𝑧′
𝑖,where 𝑧𝑖 isthe 𝑖th anchorpointforbase-modelpredictionsand 𝑧′
𝑖 isthe
bias-correctedvalue. Forexample,iftheCNNhasapositivebiaswhenpredicting 𝑧 =10,isotonic
regressionmight“ratchetdown”thesepredictionsviathemapping 𝑧= 10→ 𝑧′= 9.5. For𝑧-values
thatfallbetweentwoanchorpoints,isotonicregressionuseslinearinterpolationtoachievethebias
correction. During training, the mapping is adjusted to minimize mean squared error, subject to
the isotonic constraint: if𝑧𝑘 > 𝑧 𝑗, then𝑧′
𝑘 > 𝑧′
𝑗. In other words, isotonic regression cannot change
the rank order of predictions.
Isotonic regression is a univariate method, with one input variable𝑧 and one output variable
𝑧′. Thus, we train four separate isotonic-regression models for each CNN, letting zonal correction
distance beΔ𝑐 and meridional correction distance beΔ𝑟:
1a. One to correct the ensemble-meanΔ𝑐. Here, the input variable is the CNN ensemble mean
Δ𝑐, and the output variable is the correctΔ𝑐.
1b. Same as above but forΔ𝑟.
2a. One to correct the ensemble spread forΔ𝑐. Here, the input variable is the CNN ensemble
variance forΔ𝑐, and the output variable is the squared error of the CNN ensemble mean for
Δ𝑐. Thus, the goal is to make CNN variance = mean squared error (MSE), or equivalently, to
make CNN standard deviation = RMSE. In other words, the goal is to achieve a spread-skill
ratio of 1.0.
2b. Same as above but forΔ𝑟.
56
The effects of isotonic regression are illustrated in Figure C1.
Figure C1: Demonstration of isotonic regression (iso-reg), applied here to the zonal correction
distance. Correction #1 affects only the ensemble mean, and correction #2 affects only the
ensemble spread. [a] Effects of correction #1 on the ensemble mean for 50 randomly selected TC
samples in the testing data. For actual values (black), “zonal correction distance” = (𝑥-coordinate
of true center) minus (𝑥-coordinate of first-guess center). For the predictions, “zonal correction
distance” = (𝑥-coordinate of predicted center) minus (𝑥-coordinate of first-guess center). Note
that iso-reg preserves the rank order of predictions. [b] Effects of correction #1 on the full
ensemble for one randomly selected TC sample in the testing data. [c] Effects of correction #2 on
the ensemble spread for the same 50 TC samples as in panel a. [d] Effects of correction #2 on the
full ensemble for the same TC sample as in panel b. To convert the ensemble into a smooth
probability curve, we use the Scott (2015) method for kernel-density estimation, as implemented
in gaussian_kde in the scipy library (Virtanen et al. 2020).
57
References
Barlow, R., and H. Brunk, 1972: The isotonic regression problem and its dual.Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 67 (337), 140–147, URL http://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.
1972.10481216.
Bourel,M.,J.Cugliari,Y.Goude,andJ.Poggi,2024: Boostingdiversityinregressionensembles.
The ASA Data Science Journal, 17 (1), e11654, URL https://doi.org/10.1002/sam.11654.
Chaurasia,S.,M.Kishtawal,andP.Pal,2010: Anobjectivemethodofcyclonecentredetermination
fromgeostationarysatelliteobservations. InternationalJournalofRemoteSensing ,31(9),2429–
2440, URL https://doi.org/10.1080/01431160903012457.
Chirokova,G.,andCoauthors,2023: ProxyVis–Aproxyfornighttimevisibleimageryapplicable
to geostationary satellite observations.Weather and Forecasting, 38 (12), 2527–2550, URL
https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-23-0038.1.
Chiu, H., E. Adeli, and J. Niebles, 2020: Segmenting the future.IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 5 (3), 4202–4209, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2020.2992184.
Chollet, F., 2018:Deep Learning with Python. Manning, Shelter Island, New York.
Delle Monache, L., F. Eckel, D. Rife, B. Nagarajan, and K. Searight, 2013: Probabilistic weather
prediction with an analog ensemble.Monthly Weather Review, 141 (10), 3498–3516, URL
https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-12-00281.1.
DeMaria, M., and Coauthors, 2022: The National Hurricane Center Tropical Cyclone Model
Guidance Suite.Weather and Forecasting, 37 (11), 2141–2159, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/
WAF-D-22-0039.1.
Deng, J., W. Dong, R. Socher, L. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei, 2009: ImageNet: A large-scale
hierarchical image database.IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
248–255, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.5206848.
Duda, R., and P. Hart, 1972: Use of the Hough transformation to detect lines and curves in
pictures. Communications of the Association for Computing Machinery, 15 (1), 11–15, URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/361237.361242.
58
Dvorak, V., 1975: A technique for the analysis and forecasting of tropical cyclone intensities from
satellite pictures. Monthly Weather Review, 103 (5), 420–430, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/
1520-0493(1975)103,0420:TCIAAF.2.0.CO;2.
Dvorak, V., 1984: Tropical cyclone intensity analysis using satellite data. Tech. rep. URL https:
//repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/19322.
Goodfellow, I., Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, 2016:Deep Learning. MIT Press, URL https:
//www.deeplearningbook.org.
Goodman,S.,T.Schmit,J.Daniels,andR.Redmon,2019: TheGOES-RSeries: ANewGeneration
of Geostationary Environmental Satellites. Elsevier.
Hamill, T., 2001: Interpretation of rank histograms for verifying ensemble forecasts.Monthly
Weather Review, 129 (3), 550–560, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0493(2001)129%
3C0550:IORHFV%3E2.0.CO;2.
Haynes, K., R. Lagerquist, M. McGraw, K. Musgrave, and I. Ebert-Uphoff, 2023: Creating
and evaluating uncertainty estimates with neural networks for environmental-science applica-
tions. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems, 2 (2), 1–29, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/
AIES-D-22-0061.1.
He, K., X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, 2016: Deep residual learning for image recognition.IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 770–778, URL https://openaccess.
thecvf.com/content_cvpr_2016/html/He_Deep_Residual_Learning_CVPR_2016_paper.html.
Heming, J., and Coauthors, 2019: Review of recent progress in tropical cyclone track forecasting
and expression of uncertainties.Tropical Cyclone Research and Review, 8 (4), 181–218, URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcrr.2020.01.001.
Ho, C., D. Hyeon, M. Chang, G. McFarquhar, and S. Won, 2024: Geostationary satellite–derived
positioning of a tropical cyclone center using artificial intelligence algorithms over the western
North Pacific. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 105 (3), E486–E500, URL
https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-23-0130.1.
Hough,P., 1962: Methodandmeansforrecognizingcomplexpatterns.URLhttps://patentimages.
storage.googleapis.com/pdfs/US3069654.pdf, u.S. Patent 3,069,654.
59
Hsu, W., and A. Murphy, 1986: The attributes diagram: A geometrical framework for assessing
the quality of probability forecasts.International Journal of Forecasting, 2 (3), 285–293, URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-2070(86)90048-8.
Jaiswal, N., and C. Kishtawal, 2010: Automatic determination of center of tropical cyclone in
satellite-generated IR images.IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, 8 (3), 460–463,
URL https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2010.2085418.
Keller,J.,andCoauthors,2019: Theextratropicaltransitionoftropicalcyclones.PartII:Interaction
with the midlatitude flow, downstream impacts, and implications for predictability.Monthly
Weather Review, 147 (4), 1077–1106, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-17-0329.1.
Kieper,M.,andH.Jiang,2012: Predictingtropicalcyclonerapidintensificationusingthe37GHz
ring pattern identified from passive microwave measurements.Geophysical Research Letters,
39 (13), URL https://doi.org/10.1029/2012GL052115.
Kim, K., J. Kim, Y. Moon, E. Park, G. Shin, T. Kim, Y. Kim, and S. Hong, 2019: Nighttime
reflectance generation in the visible band of satellites.Remote Sensing, 11 (18), 2087, URL
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11182087.
Kim, P., and S. Hong, 2019: Deep learning-generated nighttime reflectance and daytime radiance
of the midwave infrared band of a geostationary satellite.Remote Sensing, 11 (22), 2713, URL
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs11222713.
Knaff, J., D. Brown, J. Courtney, G. Gallina, and J. Beven, 2010: An evaluation of Dvorak
technique–based tropical cyclone intensity estimates.Weather and Forecasting, 25 (5), 1362–
1379, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/2010WAF2222375.1.
Kumar, V., C. Chung, and C. Lindley, 1994: Toward building an expert system for weather
forecasting operations.Expert Systems with Applications, 7 (2), 373–381, URL https://doi.org/
10.1016/0957-4174(94)90050-7.
Lagerquist, R., A. McGovern, C. Homeyer, D. Gagne, and T. Smith, 2020: Deep learning on
three-dimensional multiscale data for next-hour tornado prediction.Monthly Weather Review,
148 (7), 2837–2861, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-19-0372.1.
60
Lagerquist, R., D. Turner, I. Ebert-Uphoff, J. Stewart, and V. Hagerty, 2021: Using deep learning
to emulate and accelerate a radiative transfer model.Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Technology, 38 (10), 1673–1696, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-21-0007.1.
Landsea, C., and J. Franklin, 2013: Atlantic hurricane database uncertainty and presentation of a
new database format.Monthly Weather Review, 141 (10), 3576–3592, URL https://doi.org/10.
1175/MWR-D-12-00254.1.
Leslie, L., and G. Holland, 1995: On the bogussing of tropical cyclones in numerical models: A
comparison of vortex profiles.Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics, 56 (1-2), 101–110, URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01022523.
Lin, W., M. Portabella, A. Stoffelen, and A. Verhoef, 2013: On the characteristics of ASCAT
wind direction ambiguities.Atmospheric Measurement Techniques, 6 (4), 1053–1060, URL
https://doi.org/10.5194/amt-6-1053-2013.
Lu, X., H. Yu, X. Yang, X. Li, and J. Tang, 2019: A new technique for automatically locating
the center of tropical cyclones with multi-band cloud imagery.Frontiers of Earth Science, 13,
836–847, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s11707-019-0784-6.
Mayers, D., and C. Ruf, 2019: Tropical cyclone center fix using CYGNSS winds. Journal
of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 58 (9), 1993–2003, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/
JAMC-D-19-0054.1.
Muriga,V.,B.Rich,F.Mauro,A.Sebastianelli,andS.Ullo,2023: Amachinelearningapproachto
long-termdroughtpredictionusingnormalizeddifferenceindicescomputedonaspatiotemporal
dataset. IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 4927–4930, URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS52108.2023.10282592.
Nguyen,T.,M.Raghu,andS.Kornblith,2020: Dowideanddeepnetworkslearnthesamethings?
Uncovering how neural network representations vary with width and depth.arXiv e-prints,
2010 (15327), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.15327.
Nigam, A., and S. Srivastava, 2023: Hybrid deep learning models for traffic stream variables
prediction during rainfall.Multimodal Transportation, 2 (1), 100052, URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.multra.2022.100052.
61
NOAA STAR, 2019: Summary of the GOES-17 cooling system issue. URL https://www.star.
nesdis.noaa.gov/GOES/loopheatpipeanomaly.php.
Olander, T., and C. Velden, 2007: The advanced Dvorak technique: Continued development of
an objective scheme to estimate tropical cyclone intensity using geostationary infrared satellite
imagery.Weather and Forecasting, 22 (2), 287–298, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF975.1.
Olander, T., and C. Velden, 2019: The advanced Dvorak technique (ADT) for estimating tropical
cycloneintensity: Updateandnewcapabilities. WeatherandForecasting,34(4),905–922,URL
https://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-19-0007.1.
Olander, T., C. Velden, and M. Turk, 2002: Development of the advanced objective Dvorak
technique (AODT) – Current progress and future directions.Conference on Hurricanes and
Tropical Meteorology, San Diego, California, American Meteorological Society, URL https:
//ams.confex.com/ams/pdfpapers/35977.pdf.
Reiss,N.,andJ.Hofmann,1988: TEACHMET:Anexpertsystemforteachingweatherforecasting.
JournalofAtmosphericandOceanicTechnology ,5(2),368–374,URLhttps://doi.org/10.1175/
1520-0426(1988)005%3C0368:TAESFT%3E2.0.CO;2.
Ronneberger, O., P. Fischer, and T. Brox, 2015: U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical
image segmentation.International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
assisted Intervention, Munich, Germany, Technical University of Munich, URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4_28.
Rozoff, C., C. Velden, J. Kaplan, J. Kossin, and A. Wimmers, 2015: Improvements in the proba-
bilisticpredictionoftropicalcyclonerapidintensificationwithpassivemicrowaveobservations.
WeatherandForecasting,30(4),1016–1038,URLhttps://doi.org/10.1175/WAF-D-14-00109.1.
Sampson, C., and A. Schrader, 2000: The Automated Tropical Cyclone Forecasting System
(version 3.2).Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 81 (6), 1231–1240, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1175/1520-0477(2000)081%3C1231:TATCFS%3E2.3.CO;2.
Scott,D.,2015: MultivariateDensityEstimation: Theory,Practice,andVisualization .JohnWiley
& Sons.
62
Shin, Y., J. Lee, J. Im, and S. Sim, 2022: An advanced operational approach for tropical cyclone
centerestimationusinggeostationary-satellite-basedwatervaporandinfraredchannels. Remote
Sensing,14 (19), 4800, URL https://doi.org/10.3390/rs14194800.
Smith, M., and R. Tuomi, 2021: Using video recognition to identify tropical cyclone posi-
tions. Geophysical Research Letters, 48 (7), e2020GL091912, URL https://doi.org/10.1029/
2020GL091912.
Trabing, B., and M. Bell, 2020: Understanding error distributions of hurricane intensity forecasts
during rapid intensity changes.Weather and Forecasting, 35 (6), 2219–2234, URL https://doi.
org/10.1175/WAF-D-19-0253.1.
VanNaarden,J.,andD.Lindsey,2019: SavingGOES-17.URLhttps://aerospaceamerica.aiaa.org/
departments/saving-goes-17/.
Velden,C.,T.Olander,andR.Zehr,1998: Developmentofanobjectiveschemetoestimatetropical
cycloneintensityfromdigitalgeostationarysatelliteinfraredimagery. WeatherandForecasting,
13 (1), 172–186, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0434(1998)013%3C0172:DOAOST%3E2.
0.CO;2.
Velden, C., and Coauthors, 2006: The Dvorak tropical cyclone intensity estimation technique: A
satellite-based method that has endured for over 30 years.Bulletin of the American Meteorolog-
ical Society,87 (9), 1195–2010, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-87-9-1195.
Virtanen, P., and Coauthors, 2020: SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing
in Python.Nature Methods,17, 261–272, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2.
Wang, C., and X. Li, 2023: Developing a data-driven transfer learning model to locate tropical
cyclone centers on satellite infrared imagery.Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology,
40 (12), 1417–1430, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/JTECH-D-23-0026.1.
Wang,C.,Q.Xu,X.Li,G.Zheng,B.Liu,andY.Cheng,2019: Anobjectivetechniquefortyphoon
monitoring with satellite infrared imagery.IEEE Photonics and Electromagnetics Research
Symposium – Fall, 3218–3221, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/PIERS-Fall48861.2019.9021497.
Wang, P., P. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Yuan, and D. Wang, 2020: A center location algorithm for
tropical cyclone in satellite infrared images.IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth
63
ObservationsandRemoteSensing ,13,2161–2172,URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2020.
2995158.
Wimmers, A., and C. Velden, 2016: Advancements in objective multisatellite tropical cyclone
center fixing.Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 55 (1), 197–212, URL https:
//doi.org/10.1175/JAMC-D-15-0098.1.
Xin, L., W.Luyuan, W.Yongquan, Y.Peiyao, andZ.Shengdong, 2022: Designandapplicationof
OBDH subsystem for Gaofen-4 satellite.International Conference on Signal and Information
Processing, Networking and Computers (ICSINC), Singapore, Singapore, URL https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-981-19-3387-5_30.
Yang, X., Z. Zhan, and J. Shen, 2019: A deep learning based method for typhoon recognition
and typhoon center location.IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium,
9871–9874, URL https://doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS.2019.8899322.
You, Q., Z. Li, C. Qian, and T. Wang, 2022: A tropical cyclone center location method based
on satellite image.Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience, URL https://doi.org/10.1155/
2022/3747619.
Zheng, G., J. Liu, J. Yang, and X. Li, 2019: Automatically locate tropical cyclone centers using
top cloud motion data derived from geostationary satellite images.IEEE Transactions on Geo-
scienceandRemoteSensing ,57(12),10175–10190,URLhttps://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2019.
2931795.
64
Uncertainty-aware center-fixing of tropical cyclones using convolutional
neural networks with infrared satellite imagery
Supplemental material
This is the second version (first revision) of an article under review in the AMS
journal Weather and Forecasting.
1. Quality control of IR satellite data
Satellite data sometimes contain missing or corrupt values. Thus, we perform quality control,
using the following procedure for every 2-D image (definition: one channel for one TC sample).
1. Remove brightness temperatures outside the acceptable range. Specifically, we replace any
valueoutside[170, 330] KwithNaNtoindicateamissingvalue. Theselimitsapproximately
represent the coldest cloud top and warmest surface temperature observed on Earth.
2. Countthenumberofpixelswithmissing(NaN)values, 𝑁missing, notingthatthesevaluesmay
appear in the original image or be created by step 1. If𝑁missing > 6250, proceed to step 3.
Otherwise, proceed to step 4.
3. Flag the entire TC sample as invalid and remove it from the dataset, so that it cannot be used
fortrainingorevaluation. Bysubjectiveanalysis,imageswithmorethan6250missingpixels
(0.4% of the image) often cannot be made to look plausible by interpolation.
4. Fill the missing values by interpolation. Specifically, each NaN is replaced with its nearest
real-valued neighbour on the grid.
Figure S1 shows a randomly selected TC sample affected by the loop-heat-pipe issue on the
GOES-17 satellite. By visual inspection, this TC sample contains seven channels1 with too much
corrupted information to be recovered by interpolation. Our quality-control algorithm correctly
flags the TC sample as invalid and removes it from the dataset.
1These are band 8 (6.185𝜇m), band 9 (6.95𝜇m), band 10 (7.34𝜇m), band 11 (8.5𝜇m), band 12 (9.61𝜇m), band 15 (12.3𝜇m), and band
16 (13.3𝜇m).
1
Figure S1: Raw (not quality-controlled) IR satellite imagery valid at 1200 UTC 21 Oct 2022 for
Hurricane Roslyn (EP192022). Each panel shows brightness temperature at one spectral channel
(colour fill) and the FBT center (green star).
2. CNN hyperparameters
Some details of our CNNs are discussed in the main text, including the architecture (Main
Section 3a), training procedure (Main Section 3b), uncertainty quantification (Main Section 3c),
andexperimentalhyperparameters(MainSection3e). However,manyhyperparameterchoicesare
not justified in the main text (Table S1), and some hyperparameters are not mentioned there at all
(Tables S2-S3).
2
Table S1: Fixed hyperparameters, part 1: convolutional layers (CL), pooling layers, and fully
connected layers (FCL). The first FCL is the orange arrow (Figure 3 of main text) connecting
boxes labeled “1129 features” and “232 features”. The number of weights in an FCL connecting
shallower layerS to deeper layerD is 𝑁S(𝑁D+ 1), where the𝑁 are the number of features in the
two layers.
Hyperparameter Value chosen Justification
Size of convolutional fil-
ters
3× 3 pixels Smallest filter size possible (other than 1× 1, which cannot detect spatial
patternsatall). AllowsthefirstCLs(blackarrowsandleftcolumnofpurple
arrows in Main Figure 3) to learn features at the finest scale (where 1 pixel
= 2 km), while pooling allows deeper CLs to learn features at coarser scales
(where 1 pixel> 2 km).
Numberoffeaturemapsby
CL
10 for first CLs (black ar-
rowsinMainFigure3),in-
creasing to 70 for last CLs
AcommonchoiceintheMLliterature( e.g.,SimonyanandZisserman2014;
Wimmers et al. 2019; Sha et al. 2020) is to double the number of feature
maps after each pooling; in Main Figure 3 this would lead to a progression
from 10→ 20→ 40→ 80→ 160→ 320→ 640 feature maps, rather than
10→ 20→ 30→ 40→ 50→ 60→ 70. The first NN would be too large
for our memory resources and therefore impossible to train.
NumberoffeaturesbyFCL Exponential decrease AsuperlineardecreaseisneededtopreventtheweightcountintheFCLsfrom
exploding. Forexample,inMainFigure3,thefirstFCLhas (1129+ 1)× 232
= 0.26 million weights. With a linear decrease from 1129 to 100 features,
thislayerwouldhave (1129+ 1)× 786=0.89millionweights,nearlytripling
the weight count in the entire NN from 0.44 million to 1.06 million. Thus,
we implement an exponential decrease from the number of concatenated
features (1129 in Main Figure 3) to the number of output variables (2; an𝑥-
and 𝑦-coordinate). We then increase the feature count for the last layer to
100, allowing for ensemble prediction.
Number of pooling layers Whatever leads to a final
imagesizeof4-7pixelsper
dimension. InMainFigure
3,thismeans6poolinglay-
ers.
From prior ML experience, the coarsest grid should have∼4 pixels in each
direction. Morepooling( e.g.,thenextgridinMainFigure3wouldbe 2× 2)
destroys too much spatial information; less pooling (e.g., the previous grid
in Main Figure 3 is8× 8) prevents the NN from leveraging the largest-scale
features.
Type of pooling filter
(mean or maximum)
Maximum Maximum-pooling adds more non-linearity to the NN than the alternative
(mean-pooling), which is a linear operation. Also, maximum-pooling better
emphasizes sharp gradients, such as those associated with deep convection
(cold cloud tops) around the TC center (typically warmer cloud tops).
3
Table S2: Fixed hyperparameters, part 2: other layers (activation, batch normalization) and
regularization (dropout, L2 penalty). “AF” = activation function. “Hidden layers” include every
convolutional and fully connected layer except the output layer. We use a different regularization
method for CLs (the L2 penalty) vs. FCLs (dropout), because dropout was designed specifically
for FCLs (Hinton et al. 2012). We use dropout only for hidden FCLs (all except the output layer),
because from prior ML experience, dropout on the output layer yields extremely poor predictions.
Hyperparameter Value chosen Justification
AF for hidden layers Leaky ReLU (Maas et al.
2013) with slope of 0.2
Defined as 𝑓( 𝑥)= max( 𝑥, 0.2𝑥), where 𝑥 is a feature value. This leaves
positive values untouched and multiplies negative values by 0.2. Leaky
ReLU combines the best properties of strict ReLU and the identity function
(Chapter 4 of Lagerquist 2020). We choose a slope of 0.2 based on prior
experience.
AF for output layer None Common AFs clip the data to a range of0 . . .∞ (e.g., ReLU),0 . . .1 (e.g.,
sigmoid and softmax), or−1 . . .+ 1 (e.g., tanh). The outputs are estimates
ofΔ𝑟 andΔ𝑐 – the row and column offsets between the image center and
trueTCcenter– whichbothcanbelargepositiveorlargenegativenumbers.
Thus, we do not want to clip the output range with an AF.
Batch normalization (BN;
Ioffe and Szegedy 2015)
Onforhiddenlayers,offfor
output layer
BN alleviates the vanishing-gradient problem often experienced by NNs
with many layers (Chapter 4 of Lagerquist 2020). BN transforms data to a
standard normal distribution – where nearly all values range from[−3,+3]
– making it inappropriate for the output layer.
Strength of L2 regulariza-
tion
10-6 Chosen from an earlier hyperparameter experiment (not shown), where we
varied L2 strength from 10-7 to 10-5.
Dropout rate 0.5 Chosen from the same earlier hyperparameter experiment, where we varied
dropout rate from 0.125 to 0.5.
4
Table S3: Fixed hyperparameters, part 3: training procedure.
Hyperparameter Value chosen Justification
Number of epochs 1000 In each epoch, 36 training batches and 12 validation batches – with 20
samples per batch (see Section 3b of main text) – are presented to the NN.
Optimizer AdamW (Loshchilov and
Hutter 2017)
More sophisticated version of stochastic gradient descent (Section 8.3.1 of
Goodfellow et al. 2016).
Learning rate Startwith0.001,reduceby
5% upon 10-epoch plateau
A starting value of 0.001 is the default for the AdamW optimizer in Keras;
a “10-epoch plateau” means that validation loss has not reached a new min-
imum in the last 10 epochs. While developing GeoCenter, we found that a
10-epoch waiting period and 5% reduction factor lead to better model per-
formance than our previous preference, namely a 20-epoch waiting period
and 40% reduction factor.
3. Further validation results for hyperparameter experiment
HereweexpandontheresultsinSection4ofthemaintext,whichshowstwoevaluationmetrics:
mean Euclidean distance and SSRAT. Figures S2-S9 show the other eight metrics.
Figure S2: Median Euclidean distance on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to median Euclidean distance.
5
Figure S3: RMS Euclidean distance on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to RMS Euclidean distance.
Figure S4: Coordinate-averaged absolute bias on all validation data (both tropical and
non-tropical systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks
the selected (best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to
coordinate-averaged absolute bias.
6
Figure S5: Coordinate-averaged reliability on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to coordinate-averaged
reliability.
Figure S6: Coordinate-averaged CRPS on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to coordinate-averaged CRPS.
7
Figure S7: Coordinate-averaged SSREL on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to coordinate-averaged
SSREL.
Figure S8: Coordinate-averaged DTMF on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model. There is no marker for the best coordinate-averaged DTMF, because most
models achieve the optimal DTMF of 1.0.
8
Figure S9: Coordinate-averaged RHD on all validation data (both tropical and non-tropical
systems), with respect to all three experimental hyperparameters. The circle marks the selected
(best overall) model, while the star marks the best model according to coordinate-averaged RHD.
4. Further testing results for final ensemble
Section 5 of the main text presents an objective evaluation of the final ensemble – henceforth,
GeoCenter – along with several case studies. That evaluation is based only on tropical systems in
thetestingdata. Thefollowingsubsectionspresentanobjectiveevaluationfor non-tropicalsystems
and forall systems, then expand upon the case studies.
a. Objective evaluation for non-tropical systems
Figures S10-S13 are analogous to Figures 7-10 in the main text but fornon-tropical systems in
the testing data. Tropical systems are defined in Table 3 of the main text; non-tropical systems
encompass the rest of the dataset.
9
Figure S10: Performance of GeoCenter ensemble mean on non-tropical systems in testing data.
Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 7 in the main text.
10
Figure S11: Performance of GeoCenter uncertainty estimates on non-tropical systems in testing
data. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 8 in the main text.
11
Figure S12: Performance of GeoCenter on non-tropical systems in testing data, as a function of
TC intensity and true TC-center latitude (from FBT). Formatting is explained in Figure 9 of the
main text.
12
Figure S13: Performance of GeoCenter on non-tropical systems in testing data, as a function of
nadir-relative position (FBT center). Formatting is explained in Figure 10 of the main text.
b. Objective evaluation for all systems
Figures S14-S17 are analogous to Figures 6-10 in the main text but forall systems, rather than
only tropical systems, in the testing data. Note that the two sets of figures are quite similar, as the
testing dataset is dominated by tropical systems (6832 samples vs. 1328).
13
Figure S14: Performance of GeoCenter ensemble mean on all systems in testing data. Formatting
is explained in the caption of Figure 7 in the main text.
14
Figure S15: Performance of GeoCenter uncertainty estimates on all systems in testing data.
Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 8 in the main text.
15
FigureS16: PerformanceofGeoCenteronallsystemsintestingdata,asafunctionofTCintensity
and true TC-center latitude (from FBT). Formatting is explained in Figure 9 of the main text.
16
Figure S17: Performance of GeoCenter on all systems in testing data, as a function of
nadir-relative position (FBT center). Formatting is explained in Figure 10 of the main text.
c. Further details on case studies
For every case study in the main text (Figures 13-16), only one random first guess is shown,
along with all IR predictors at the 0-min lag time. Here we show all eight first guesses for every
case study, along with a smaller subset of IR predictors: just band 11 (wavelength = 8.5𝜇m for
GOES, 8.6 𝜇m for Himawari) at the 0-min lag time. In this way, Figures S18-S21 are analogous
to Figures 13-16 of the main text.
17
Figure S18: Case study: Tropical Depression Dujuan/Auring (WP012021), with an intensity of
35 kt at 0600 UTC 21 Feb 2021. Each panel corresponds to one of the eight first guesses applied
to the original TC sample. Each panel shows one 2-D slice of the IR predictors – band 11
(wavelength = 8.6𝜇m) at the 0-min lag time – along with probability contours representing
estimated TC-center locations from the 150 members of the GeoCenter ensemble. Darker greens
correspond to higher GeoCenter probabilities, and the green circle inside the innermost contour is
the GeoCenter ensemble mean. The red square is the image center, and the black star is the true
TC center. The title of each panel gives the error of the ensemble mean (𝑥-coordinate,
𝑦-coordinate,andEuclidean)andthestandarddeviationoftheensemblemembers, i.e.,thespread.
18
Figure S19: Case study: Super Typhoon Chanthu/Kiko (WP192021), with an intensity of 145 kt
at 0000 UTC 11 Sep 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure S18.
19
Figure S20: Casestudy: Tropical DepressionFred (AL062021), with an intensityof 30 ktat 0000
UTC 13 Aug 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure S18.
20
Figure S21: Case study: extratropical remnants of Tropical Storm Odette (AL152021) at 0600
UTC 22 Sep 2021. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure S18.
Thefifthandlastcasestudy(FigureS22; notshowninthemaintext)isastormthattransitioned
to a remnant low three days prior (Newton; EP152022). Although the system contains several
small areas of deep convection with no obvious center, it still contains remnants of a spiral cloud
band around 16◦N, most visible at 3.9, 8.5, and 11.2𝜇m. Similar to the Odette case, GeoCenter
locatesthecenterofNewtonquiteeffectively,withaEuclideanerrorof21.1km. FigureS23shows
that the mean error over all eight first guesses is 23.6 km.
21
Figure S22: Case study: remnant low of Tropical Storm Newton (EP152022) at 1200 UTC 28
Sep 2022. As for case studies shown in the main text, each panel shows the brightness
temperature at a different IR channel, but all panels show the same random first guess.
22
Figure S23: Case study: remnant low of Tropical Storm Newton (EP152022) at 1200 UTC 28
Sep 2022. As for Figures S18-S21, each panel shows a different random first guess.
5. Comparison between bias-corrected and uncorrected GeoCenter
Section5aofthemaintextevaluatesthefinalGeoCenterensemble,whichusesisotonicregression
forbiascorrection,ontropicalsystemsinthetestingdata. Thissectionisanalogousbutevaluatesthe
GeoCenter ensemble without bias correction, henceforth GeoCenter-no-bc. Figure S24 evaluates
the GeoCenter-no-bc ensemble mean; Figure 7 of the main text is the analogue for GeoCenter.
Bias correction improves every metric shown in these figures, except for bias in the𝑦-coordinate
(“mean 𝑦-error” in panel d), which is -0.6 km for GeoCenter and -0.4 km for GeoCenter-no-bc.
23
Figure S24: Performance of GeoCenter-no-bc ensemble mean on tropical systems in testing data.
Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 7 in the main text.
Figure S24 evaluates GeoCenter-no-bc uncertainty estimates; Figure 8 of the main text is the
analogueforGeoCenter. Again,biascorrectionimproveseverymetricshowninthesefigures,with
theexceptionofDTMF,whichisalready100%(theoptimalvalue)withoutbiascorrection. Overall,
bias correction soundly improves the performance of both the ensemble mean and uncertainty
estimates.
24
Figure S25: Performance of GeoCenter-no-bc uncertainty estimates on tropical systems in testing
data. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 8 in the main text.
6. Comparison between GeoCenter with and without ATCF predictors
Section 5a of the main text evaluates the final GeoCenter ensemble, which uses nine ATCF
predictors (Table 3 of main text), on tropical systems in the testing data. This section evaluates
an analogous GeoCenter ensemble, henceforth GeoCenter-no-ATCF, with two differences. First,
GeoCenter-no-ATCF is trained without ATCF predictors; thus, its predictors include only IR
25
imagery. The second difference – which arose incidentally and not by experimental design – is
that GeoCenter-no-ATCF uses slightly different wavelengths. For GeoCenter we found that a 3-
memberensemble– omittingtheCNNtrainedwithwavelengths {3.9, 6.185, 6.95}𝜇m– performs
betterthanthe4-memberensemble. Similarly,forGeoCenter-no-ATCF,wefoundthata3-member
ensemble– omittingtheCNNtrainedwithwavelengths {8.5, 9.61, 12.3}𝜇m– performsbetterthan
the 4-member ensemble.
Figures S26-S29 are analogous to Figures 7-10 in the main text but for GeoCenter-no-ATCF.
Note that GeoCenter outperforms GeoCenter-no-ATCF on nearly every metric shown in these
figures, i.e., the ATCF predictors lead to better performance. However, GeoCenter-no-ATCF still
soundly outperforms ARCHER-2 when only IR data are available. For example, GeoCenter-no-
ATCF achieves a median Euclidean error of 24.8 km (Figure S26e), compared to 43-49 km for
ARCHER-2 applied to IR data (Figure 11c of main text).
Figure S26: Performance of GeoCenter-no-ATCF ensemble mean on tropical systems in testing
data. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 7 in the main text.
26
Figure S27: Performance of GeoCenter-no-ATCF uncertainty estimates on tropical systems in
testing data. Formatting is explained in the caption of Figure 8 in the main text.
27
Figure S28: Performance of GeoCenter-no-ATCF on tropical systems in testing data, as a
function of TC intensity and true TC-center latitude (from FBT). Formatting is explained in
Figure 9 of the main text.
28
FigureS29: PerformanceofGeoCenter-no-ATCFontropicalsystemsintestingdata,asafunction
of nadir-relative position (FBT center). Formatting is explained in Figure 10 of the main text.
7. Importance-ranking of individual IR channels
ToquantifytheimportanceofindividualIRchannels,wetrain10differentCNNs,eachwithone
channel in the predictors. Other than IR channels, these models use the same hyperparameters as
those in the final GeoCenter ensemble: a 600-by-600-km domain, 9 lag times, and trained with
a uniform distribution of first-guess errors. The single-channel models are also bias-corrected
with isotonic regression. Figure S30 shows evaluation metrics, based on all systems (tropical and
non-tropical) in the testing data, for the single-channel models. The best individual wavelengths
appear to be 8.5 and 9.61𝜇m, while the worst single wavelength appears to be 3.9𝜇m.
29
Figure S30: Performance of single-channel GeoCenter models on all systems (tropical and
non-tropical) in testing data. For SSRAT, the optimal value is 1.0, indicated by the horizontal
dashed line. DTMF is positively oriented, with an optimal value of 1.0. All other metrics are
negatively oriented, with an optimal value of 0.0.
8. Sensitivity of GeoCenter to magnitude of first-guess error
This section investigates the sensitivity of the final GeoCenter ensemble to the magnitude of
the first-guess error, specifically the whole-track error. This is the Euclidean distance between the
imagecenteratlagtime=0minandthetrueTCcenter. Foreveryoffsetdistancein {2, 4, 6, . . . ,120}
km, we apply the following steps:
1. Create an ancillary testing set. For 17 TCs in the testing set, apply 8 random first guesses
to every TC sample. We follow the procedure from Section 3b of the main text, except that
herethewhole-trackerrorisconstant,ratherthandrawnfromadistribution. The directionfor
30
whole-track error is still random, and the track-shape error is also still random, with distance
drawn from the distribution max{0km,N( 10 km, 5 km)}.
2. Apply GeoCenter to this ancillary testing set and compute the errors.
Step 1 is the same first-guess procedure used to train GeoCenter, except with a constant distance
for the whole-track error. We use only 17 TCs in the testing set – randomly selected – due to
limitations on computing time.
The resulting sensitivity curve is shown in Figure S31. As long as the first-guess error is
below 55 km, both the mean and median GeoCenter errors remain below 20 km. As first-guess
error increases to 120 km, the mean and median GeoCenter errors increase to 40 and 37 km,
respectively. Thus, although GeoCenter is sensitive to the magnitude of the first-guess error, even
withanextremefirst-guesserrorof120km,GeoCenteroutperformstheIRversionofARCHER-2
(Figure 11c of main text).
31
Figure S31: Sensitivity of GeoCenter to magnitude of first-guess error, based on all time steps
(tropical and non-tropical) from 17 randomly selected TCs in the testing set.
References
Goodfellow, I., Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, 2016: Deep Learning. MIT Press, URL https:
//www.deeplearningbook.org.
32
Hinton, G., N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, 2012: Improving
neural networks by preventing co-adaptation of feature detectors.arXiv e-prints, 1207 (0580),
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1207.0580.
Ioffe, S., and C. Szegedy, 2015: Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift.International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille, France,
International Machine Learning Society, URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167.
Lagerquist, R., 2020: Using deep learning to improve prediction and understanding of high-
impact weather. URL https://shareok.org/handle/11244/324145, doctoral dissertation, School
of Meteorology, University of Oklahoma.
Loshchilov, I., and F. Hutter, 2017: Decoupled weight decay regularization. arXiv e-prints ,
1711 (05101), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101.
Maas, A., A. Hannun, and A. Ng, 2013: Rectifier nonlinearities improve neural network
acoustic models. International Conference on Machine Learning , Atlanta, Georgia, Interna-
tionalMachineLearningSociety,URLhttp://robotics.stanford.edu/~amaas/papers/relu_hybrid_
icml2013_final.pdf.
Sha, Y., D. Gagne, G. West, and R. Stull, 2020: Deep-learning-based gridded downscaling
of surface meteorological variables in complex terrain. Part II: Daily precipitation.Journal
of Applied Meteorology and Climatology , 59 (12), 2075–2092, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/
JAMC-D-20-0058.1.
Simonyan, K., and A. Zisserman, 2014: Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. arXiv e-prints, 1409 (1556), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
Wimmers, A., C. Velden, and J. Cossuth, 2019: Using deep learning to estimate tropical cyclone
intensity from satellite passive microwave imagery.Monthly Weather Review, 147 (6), 2261–
2282, URL https://doi.org/10.1175/MWR-D-18-0391.1.
33
