Three-dimensional varying-order NURBS
discretization method for enhanced IGA of large
deformation frictional contact problems
Vishal Agrawal
†
†
Department of Engineering Mechanics,
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
Corresponding author email: vishala@kth.se agrawalvishal34@gmail.com
Published in CMAME on March 5, 2025 with DOI: 10.1016/j.cma.2025.117853
Abstract. In this contribution, we introduce a varying-order (VO) NURBS
discretization method to enhance the performance of the isogeometric anal-
ysis (IGA) technique for solving three-dimensional (3D) large deformation
frictional contact problems involving two deformable bodies. Building on
the promising results obtained from the previous work on the 2D isogeo-
metric contact analysis [1], this work extends the method’s capability for
tri-variate NURBS-based discretization. The proposed method allows for
independent, user-defined application of higher-order NURBS functions to
discretize the contact surface while employing the minimum order NURBS
for the remaining volume of the elastic solid. This flexible strategy enables
the possibility to refine a NURBS-constructed solid at a fixed mesh with
the controllable order elevation-based approach while preserving the original
volume parametrization. The advantages of the method are twofold. First,
employing higher-order NURBS for contact integral evaluations consider-
ably enhances the accuracy of the contact responses at a fixed mesh, fully
exploiting the advantage of higher-order NURBS specifically for contact com-
putations. Second, the minimum order NURBS for the computations in the
remaining bulk volume substantially reduces the computational cost inher-
ently associated with the standard uniform order NURBS-based isogeometric
contact analyses.
1
arXiv:2409.15621v2  [math.NA]  5 Mar 2025
The capabilities of the proposed method are demonstrated using various
contact problems between elastic solids with or without considering friction.
The results with the standard uniform order of tri-variate NURBS-based
discretizations are also included to provide a comprehensive comparative
assessment. We show that to attain results of similar accuracy, the varying-
order NURBS discretization uses a much coarser mesh resolution than the
standard uniform-order NURBS-based discretization, hence leading to a ma-
jor gain in computational efficiency for isogeometric contact analysis. The
convergence study demonstrates the consistent performance of the method
for efficient IGA of 3D frictional contact problems. Furthermore, the sim-
plicity of the method facilitates its direct integration into the existing 3D
NURBS-based IGA framework with only a few minor modifications.
Keywords: Computational contact mechanics; Isogeometric analysis; Non-
linear continuum mechanics; Sticking and sliding friction; Non-uniform dis-
cretization
1 Introduction
The significance of accurately modeling contact interactions has driven the development
of advanced numerical methods in various engineering fields. As is widely known, the
accuracy and robustness of the numerical methods in computational contact mechanics
depend primarily on two main factors. The first is the type of method employed for
enforcing contact constraints into the variational formulations of the problem [2–4]. The
most popular choices are the penalty method [5, 6], Lagrange multiplier method [7],
and a combination of both these methods, known as augmented Lagrange multiplier
method [8–10], among others. The second aspect is the type of contact algorithm utilized
for expressing the contact contributions to the discretized weak form in a specific manner.
The widely adopted algorithms are: Node-to-Segment (NTS) [5, 6, 11], Gauss-Point-to-
Surface (GPTS) [12–15], and mortar contact formulation [16–21]. For the relative merits
and demerits of the above-mentioned methods and algorithms, we refer to the above-
cited references and the textbooks of Laursen [22] and Wriggers [2].
Another factor that adversely affects the robustness and accuracy of the contact al-
gorithms is geometrical discontinuity. It arises from the traditional C0-continuous finite
2
element (FE)-based faceted representation of the contact surface [2–4]. In order to alle-
viate the issues emanating from this discontinuity, various surface smoothing strategies
have been introduced in the context of FE. They employed different CAD polynomials
in their designs such as: Hermite polynomials [10], Bernstein polynomials [23], B´ ezier
interpolation functions [24], splines polynomials [25, 26], Gregory patches [27], trian-
gular B´ ezier patches [28], and subdivision surface scheme [29]. Additionally, layer-wise
enrichment of shape functions approach by Konyukhov and Schweizerhof [30, 31] can
also be regarded as a surface smoothing technique. While these methods ensured the
smooth representation of the FE discretized contact surface, they introduced an ad-
ditional smooth layer on top of an existing FE mesh. Such layering complicated the
implementation and data management, especially in the 3D cases. Furthermore, these
methods failed to enhance the spatial convergence and struggled with large deformation
or sliding contacts scenarios.
As an alternative to the FE discretization, Hughes et al. [32] introduced the non-
uniform rational B-Splines (NURBS) based IGA technique. Attributed to the advan-
tageous key features of its underlying basis functions, i.e., NURBS, viz., the ability to
represent complex-shaped geometry in its original smooth CAD form, tailorable inter-
element continuity, and the non-negativeness, IGA has established itself as an advanta-
geous computational technology for various classes of problems. Among others, contact
mechanics belong to one of these classes that has significantly benefited from the in-
trinsic features of the IGA technique. This is because the NURBS-based description
naturally provides a smooth representation of the contact surface, with the desirable
inter-element continuity. This description leads to the unique definition of contact kine-
matics, i.e. surface normal and tangential vector fields across the contact surface even at
a very coarse mesh, also for the geometries having a very large curvature. Consequently,
the NURBS-based discretization inherently eliminates the computational issues origi-
nating from the traditional C 0-continuous FE-based discretization, leading to superior
quality results, especially for the large deformation and finite frictional sliding contact
problems. Moreover, by enabling contact search on a patch level rather than at the
element level, IGA considerably reduces the bookkeeping task associated with the local
contact search and frictional sliding contact [3].
To this date, substantial research progress has been made towards developing various
isogeometric methods for the robust and efficient treatment of a wide range of contact
problems with high accuracy. In the following, we provide a brief introduction to some
advancements. Temizer et al. [14] introduced isogeometric mortar contact formulation
3
for two-dimensional (2D) frictionless contact problems. De Lorenzis et al. [13] extended
the formulation for large deformation frictional contact problems. Dittman et al. [33]
further extended the isogeometric mortar contact formulation for thermo-mechanical
contact and impact problems. Matzen et al. [34] presented an isogeometric collocation
contact formulation as an efficient alternative to the standard Galerkin formulation for
frictionless contact problems. In the same direction, De Lorenzis et al. [35] introduced
hybrid collocation-Galerkin and enhanced collocation approaches to circumvent the is-
sues emanating from the strong imposition of Neumann boundary conditions and the
enforcement of contact constraints in the isogeometric collocation framework. Later,
Nguyen-Thanh et al. [36] introduced an adaptive isogeometric collocation method that
enables the adaptive isogeometric analysis of 2D frictional contact problems. Seitz et
al. [37] developed a dual mortar method for isogeometric analysis of mechanical and tied
contact problems and conducted the first systematic investigation into the spatial con-
verge rates of different order NURBS. We refer to the comprehensive review paper by De
Lorenzis et al. [3] for a detailed overview of the advancement in the field of isogeometric
contact analysis, and Das and Gautam [38] for the detailed applications of isogeometric
contact analysis.
Due to their unique intrinsic features, the NURBS-based discretizations provide sig-
nificantly superior results in terms of accuracy, stability, and robustness for a wide range
of contact problems as compared to its Lagrange polynomial-based counterpart. How-
ever, due to their rigid tensor product nature, the NURBS discretization lacks local mesh
refinement. Additionally, they do not support non-uniform order elevation-based refine-
ment [32, 39, 40]. Since contact is mainly a surface-dominated phenomenon, employing
uniform discretization in the region away from the contact surface is not desirable, par-
ticularly from the analysis viewpoint.
In this direction, the various strategies enabling local mesh refinement in the vicinity
of the contact surface have been introduced: T-spline for efficient IGA of frictionless
contact and cohesive interface debonding problems by Dimitri et al. [15, 41], hierarchical
NURBS-based local refinement approach for frictional contact problems Temizer and
Hesch [42], and an adaptive local surface refinement based on the locally refined NURBS
for frictional sliding contact by Zimmerman and Sauer [43].
Moreover, various FE-IGA methods have been introduced as an alternative to uni-
form NURBS discretization. Corbett and Sauer [44, 45] introduced the NURBS-enriched
contact finite elements for frictional contact and mixed-mode cohesive debonding prob-
lems. Their approach used the NURBS functions to describe the bottom or contact
4
surface of the linear-order finite element. Maleki-Jebeli et al. [46] presented the hybrid
isogeometric-FE discretization method for cohesive interface contact/debonding prob-
lems. They used NURBS in the contact/cohesive interface regions having high-stress
gradients and linear- or quadratic-order Lagrange finite elements to discretize the remain-
ing domain. Otto et al. [47] introduced a coupled FE-NURBS discretization approach
to model the contact problems between the arbitrary order of finite element discretized
bodies. In this, an auxiliary NURBS layer is added between the higher-order FE dis-
cretized contacting bodies. In Dias et al. [48], the geometric mapping of the curved
surfaces of high-order FE contact elements is performed with NURBS. The central fea-
ture of these approaches has been to combine the accuracy and stability features of the
NURBS for the contact computations with the efficiency characteristic of the FE method
for the bulk computations.
But, still, no such effort that fully exploits the key advantages of the IGA technique by
directly allowing the non-uniform order elevation-based refinement of an elastic solid for
isogeometric contact analysis has been made. We fill this research gap in the present work
by introducing a novel three-dimensional varying-order NURBS discretization method.
It enables direct usage of higher-order NURBS for the computations of quantities at
the contact surface and lower-order NURBS for the computations of quantities in the
remaining volume of an elastic solid. By retaining the intrinsic key features of the IGA
technique, the proposed method aims to enhance the performance of the IGA technique
for contact applications involving deformable solids. The proposed method extends the
previous work focused on isogeometric contact analysis in two-dimensional settings [1].
In this contribution, we show the efficacy of the proposed method for the 3D large
deformation frictional contact problems between deformable solids.
The remaining paper is structured as follows. Section 2 briefly describes the general
formulation for the frictional contact problem, including NURBS and Gauss-point-to-
surface based contact algorithm in the IGA setting. Next, Section 3 describes the pro-
posed 3D VO-based NURBS discretization method and its implementation procedure
into the existing IGA code. After that, Section 4 demonstrates the performance and ca-
pabilities of the method using various numerical examples. Finally, Section 5 concludes
the paper with the future directions.
5
2 3D large deformation frictional contact problem
This section summarizes the mathematical and algorithm background for frictional con-
tact between two bodies undergoing large deformations. The present formulation is
based on Refs. [2, 22, 49, 50]; we refer to them for more details.
2.1 Problem description and weak form
It is assumed that two bodies come into contact and undergo large deformations, as
shown in Fig. 1. In this work, according to the convention used in [2], one of them is
denoted as the slave bodyBs and another as the master bodyBm. Thus, in the following,
a superscript k ={s, m} is used to specify them. It is assumed that the bodies come
into contact by applying prescribed external surface traction and/or displacement. The
boundary ∂Bk of a bodyBk consists of the following three distinct parts: ∂Bk =∂tBk∪
∂uBk∪∂cBk, ∀t∈T , where ∂tBk and∂uBk are the boundaries where the traction and
displacement are prescribed, and ∂cBk is the potential surface where the contact occurs.
Further, it is assumed that these boundaries satisfy ∂tBk∩ ∂uBk∩∂cBk =∅, ∀t∈T .
Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the two-body contact in 3D.
To identify the contact point on the master surface, it is parameterized using the
convective coordinate vector ξm = (ξ1
m,ξ 2
m), as shown in Fig. 2. Here, ξm denotes the
parametric point computed at the master contact surface. With this, a contact point
xm∈ Γm
c on the master surface is defined by the parametric coordinates ξm asxm(ξm).
The covariant tangent vectors at ξm are defined by τα = ∂xm
∂ξαm
= xm
,α, α = 1, 2 .
The contravariant tangent vectors can be obtained directly using the following relation
6
τα =mαβ τα,, wheremαβ = [mαβ]−1 is the component of the inverse of the metric tensor
defined by mαβ = τα· τβ. The outward unit normal vector to the master surface at a
parametric point xm(ξm) is given by
n = τ1× τ2
||τ1× τ2||. (1)
Given the two reference configurationsBk
0, k ={s,m}, the prescribed displacement
¯uk on∂uBk, traction ¯tk on∂tBk, and body forces ρk ¯bk inBk, the objective is to find the
displacement fielduk∈B k, such that at an instance it satisfies the two sets k ={s,m}
of the following equilibrium equations
divσk +ρk ¯bk = 0 in Bk,
uk = ¯uk on ∂uBk,
tk =σknk = ¯tk on ∂tBk.
tk =tc on ∂cBk.
(2)
subjected to the following contact constraints for normal and frictional contact:
gN≥ 0, t N≤ 0, gNtN = 0, ∀xs
c∈∂Bs (3)
γ≥ 0, Φ≤ 0, γ Φ = 0, ∀xs
c∈∂Bs. (4)
The first set of contact constraints are known as Karush-–Kuhn-–Tucker (KKT) con-
ditions in the optimization theory [2]. In the above equation, σ is the Cauchy stress
tensor, and ¯b is body force. Moreover, tc is contact traction, g N is the normal gap, tN
is normal traction computed at the contact point, and γ and Φ are slip function and
slip parameter, described in the next section. Since the partial differential equation in
Eq. 2 1 requires the displacement field to be at least twice differentiable, it imposes a
strongC1-continuity requirement at every point of the domainBk. This continuity con-
dition can be relaxed by using the weak form of contact boundary problem, as outlined
below
δW =
s,mX
k
 
δWk
int−δWk
ext

+δWc = 0, ∀ δφk∈V k (5)
7
where
δWk
int =
Z
Bk
σk : grad (δφk) dv, (6)
δWk
ext =
Z
Bk
ρk ¯bk·δφk dv +
Z
∂tBk
¯tk·δφk da (7)
and the virtual work due to contact traction is defined as
δWc =−
Z
∂cBs
tc·δφs da +
Z
∂cBs
tc·δφm da. (8)
2.2 Closest projection point procedure
To distinguish whether the contact between the two surfaces is active or not, the closest
normal gap function is determined. For the determination of a contact point xm on
the master surface, a distance function is utilized: ˆd(ξm) := ||xs−xm(ξm)||. The
necessary condition that yields the closest contact pointxm(ξm) onto the master surface
corresponding to a given slave point xs is obtained by the minimum of the distance
function d
dξαm
ˆd(ξm) = [xs−xm(ξm)]· τα(ξm) = 0.
The corresponding parametric point ¯ξm at which d
dξαm
ˆd( ¯ξm) = 0 is referred as closest
projection point. Since the above equation is nonlinear, the Newton-Raphson (NR)
method is used to solve it in this work. Note that in the subsequent description, all the
Figure 2: A schematic illustration of the three-dimensional frictional contact quantities for
a given slave point xs. The master contact surface Γ m
c is parametrized by the coordinates ξi.
The quantities computed at the projection point ¯ξm are denoted with bar.
8
quantities computed at the projection point will be denoted with a bar, e.g. xm( ¯ξm) =
¯xm and similarly unit normal vector n at ¯ξm is denoted by ¯n, as shown in Fig. 2.
With this, the normal gap g N between a slave point xs and projection point ¯xm can
be computed with
gN = (xs− ¯xm)· ¯n, ∀xs∈∂Bs
c. (9)
2.3 Penalty regularized contact constraints
Since the contact constraints given by Eq. 3 cannot be directly incorporated into the
weak form, their regularization is needed. In the present work, we adopt the penalty
method for this, and penalty regularized normal contact constraint is defined as
tN =
(
−ϵN gN ¯n, if gN < 0
0, otherwise,
(10)
where ϵN > 0 denotes the normal penalty parameter.
Following [2, 50], the tangential traction is determined based on the changes in stick-
slip status with
tT =
(
ttrial
Tn+1, if Φtrial
n+1≤ 0,
µftNn+1nTn+1, otherwise.
(11)
where nTn+1 = ttrial
Tn+1/||ttrial
Tn+1||, µf Coulomb’s frictional coefficient, and
ttrial
Tn+1 is the penalty-regularized trial contact traction defined as ttrial
Tn+1 =
ϵT
 
xm
n+1( ¯ξmn+1)− xm
n+1(ξmsln )

, where ϵT denotes tangential penalty parameter. In
the context of the predictor-corrector algorithm that is used to handle frictional sliding,
ttrial
Tn+1 is utilized to compute the trial slip function Φ trial
n+1 =||ttrial
Tn+1||− µftNn+1. With
this, the total contact traction vector is defined as tc =tN ¯n−tα
T ¯τα .
2.4 NURBS discretized weak form
2.4.1 Geometric modeling using NURBS
In this section, the essential ingredients to construct a three-dimensional geometry us-
ing tri-variate NURBS functions are summarized. For a comprehensive description, the
readers are referred to the monographs by Pigel and Tiller [51] and Cottrell et al. [52],
as well as a tutorial paper by Agrawal and Gautam [53], which provides stepwise im-
plementation details of the IGA technique. Note that throughout this discussion, the
9
interpolation order of splines - linear, quadratic, cubic, etc. is represented asp = 1, 2, 3, ,
and so on. This is as per the notation introduced by Hughes et al. [32].
A knot vector in one-dimension is a set of non-decreasing values of coordinates in
the parametric space ξi (i = 1, 2, and 3), given by
Ξi =

ξi
1, ξi
2, ... , ξi
l, ... , ξi
ni+pi+1

, (12)
whereξi
l∈ R ∀i is thelth knot,l = 1, 2,...,n i +pi +1, pi is the interpolation order, and
ni denotes the total number of basis functions. The non-zero interval between by any
two consecutive knot values [ξi
l, ξi
l+1]> 0 is called as the knot span. Each non-zero knot
span partitions the parametric space ξi into elements, which, using the spline functions,
are mapped to the physical space.
A NURBS-constructed solid is defined by
V(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) =
n1X
l=1
n2X
m=1
n3X
n=1
Rp1,p2,p3
lmn (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3)Xlmn, (13)
whereni denotes the control points defined along theith direction, and XA is the control
point coordinate vector. The tri-variate NURBS function Rp1,p2,p3
lmn is defined via the
tensor product of the uni-variate B-spline functions as
Rp1,p2,p3
lmn (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) = wlmn
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3)Nl,p1(ξ1)Nm,p2(ξ2)Nn,p3(ξ3). (14)
where Nl,pi(ξi) is a B-spline basis function of order pi along ξi direction, and the nor-
malizing weighting function is defined as
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) =
n1X
l=1
n2X
m=1
n3X
n=1
wlmnNl,p1(ξ1)Nm,p2(ξ2)Nn,p3(ξ3). (15)
One of the key advantages of adopting CAD polynomials for IGA is that the con-
structed geometries can be refined in a straightforward fashion. The refinement strategies
enrich the underlying basis functions, allowing the accurate capture of the sharp vari-
ations in the solution field [32, 39]. The two basic methods that are used to refine the
geometry are knot insertion, which introduces additional knots or elements in a given
knot vector, and order elevation, which, as the name implies, uniformly elevates the in-
terpolation order of the basis functions. A specific application of order elevation before
10
the knot insertion leads to another strategy, namely k−refinement. These strategies
provide control over the existing knot span or mesh size, inter-element continuity, and
interpolation order of the underlying basis functions, while with their applications, the
geometry and its parametrization remain intact. For further details on refining a solid
constructed with NURBS, we refer to Pigel and Tiller [51] and Cottrell et al. [52].
In IGA, the NURBS-based description of the contact surface is directly inherited
from the NURBS-described solid. The contact surface of NURBS discretized solid is
defined by
S(ξ1,ξ 2) =
n1X
l=1
n2X
m=1
Rp1,p2
lm (ξ1,ξ 2) Xlm (16)
where Xlm⊂ Xlmn, and the bi-variate NURBS function is defined as
Rp1,p2
lm (ξ1,ξ 2) = wlm
W (ξ1,ξ 2)Nl,p1(ξ1)Nm,p2(ξ2). (17)
Following the isogeometric finite element notation, each domainBk, k ={s,m} can
be described in terms of nk
el number of NURBS elements. Consequently, the coordinates
of an arbitrary point in the reference and current configurations are given as
Xke =
nke
cpX
A=1
Re
A(ξk) Xk
A = Rke(ξk) Xke, ∈ Ωke
0 ,
xke =
nke
cpX
A=1
Rk
A(ξk) xk
A = Rke(ξk) xke, ∈ Ωke,
(18)
where nke
cp =Q
i=1,2,3 (pi + 1) denotes the control points whose corresponding NURBS
basis functions Rk(ξk) have the local support in an element. Moreover, Rke represents
the array of NURBS basis functions, and Xke and xke are coordinate vectors of the
control points in the reference and current configurations. These arrays are defined as
Rke =


Rk
1 Id
...
Rk
nkecp
Id


, Xke =


Xk
1
...
Xk
nkecp


, and xke =


xk
1
...
xk
nkecp


. (19)
where Id is the identity matrix of size 3 × 3, and the tri-variate NURBS functions.
11
2.4.2 Discretized weak form
Using the isoparametric concept, the NURBS-based approximation of the displacement
fielduke is given as
uke =
nke
cpX
A=1
Rk
A(ξk) uk
A = Rke(ξk) uke, where uke = xke− Xke. (20)
Here, uke denotes the displacement vector of control points and is defined as uke =
[uk
1, ...,uk
nkecp
]T. Following the Galerkin approach, the same NURBS functions are uti-
lized for the approximation of the test function, δφke as
δuke = Rke(ξk)δuke. (21)
Using the definition of the displacement field, the NURBS discretized weak form for
the contact boundary problem involving two deformable solids is given by
s,mX
k
(δuk)T
fk
int− fk
ext + fc

= 0, ∀δuk∈V k (22)
where fint, fext, and fc are identified as the global internal force vector, global force vector
due to external loads, and global contact force vector, respectively, corresponding to the
two-body system.
Since the variation of displacement is arbitrary, the Eq. 22 can be re-written as
fk
int− fk
ext + fc = 0, where these global force vectors are given by
fke
int =
Z
Ωke
(Bke)Tσke dΩ,
fke
ext =
Z
Ωke
ρk (Rke)T ¯bk dΩ +
Z
Γke
t
(Rke)T ¯tk dΓ
f se
c =−
Z
Γsec
(Rse)Ttc dΓ,
f me
c =
Z
Γsec
(Rme)Ttc dΓ,
(23)
where Bke is an array containing nke
cp tri-variate NURBS functions having local support
in a NURBS element.
In this work, we use the Neo-Hookean material model to describe the large deforma-
12
tion of the bodies, and the corresponding constitutive relation is given by [54]
¯W = λ
2 (lnJ)2 + µ
2 (tr(FF T)− 3)−µ(lnJ), (24)
whereF denotes the deformation gradient, J = det(F ) the volume change, and λ and
µ are the Lam´ e constants, i.e. bulk and shear moduli, and are given in terms of Young’s
modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν as λ = 2µν
(1−2ν), and µ = E
2(1+ν).
2.5 Contact algorithm
In this study, we adopt the classical full-pass version of the contact algorithm introduced
by Sauer and De Lorenzis [50], owing to its simplicity and efficiency features over the ex-
isting approaches [2, 4]. This algorithm was first proposed by Fischer and Wriggerss [12]
in the context of FE contact analysis and later extended by Temizer et al. [14], De
Lorenzis et al. [13, 55] and Dimitri et al. [15, 41, 56] for isogeometric contact analysis.
Following [15, 41, 56], we also denote this contact algorithm as “Gauss-point-to-surface
(GPTS)”. In this, the contact constraints, impenetrability, and sticking given in Eq. (3)
are independently enforced at each quadrature point. It is noted that the GPTS-based
contact algorithm passes the contact patch test within the quadrature error, which en-
sures the convergence of the solution upon mesh refinement [12, 57].
It is noted that the mathematically more sophisticated mortar contact algorithms,
e.g. by Temizer et al. [14, 58], De Lorenzis et al. [13, 55], Seitz et al. [37], and Duong
et al. [59], that have been introduced for the treatment of contact within the framework
of IGA can also be employed. However, employing such contact algorithms lies beyond
the scope of the present work. For an extensive reviews and recent developments on
the treatment of contact problems using different mortar methods, the contributions by
Popp and Wall [60] and Popp [61] can be referred.
The contact force vectors for the slave and master body’s NURBS discretized contact
element are given in Eq. 23. For the sake of completeness, the contact tangent matrices
that are obtained from the linearization of the contact force vectors are provided in
Appendix 5 for both the slave and master contact surfaces.
13
3 Varying order NURBS discretization method
For contact problems where the surface effects are predominant, enhancing the accu-
racy of contact integral evaluations is essential. This can be achieved by employing
higher-order basis functions at a fixed mesh. However, in the current NURBS-based
discretization approach, the interpolation order of the NURBS functions for both the
contact boundary and the bulk of the contact body can only be elevated uniformly due
to the rigid tensor product structure of NURBS [3]. As a result, higher-order NURBS,
intended specifically for accurate contact computations, must also be applied to the bulk
regions of the contact body that are far from the surface. This uniform elevation is in-
efficient from a computational standpoint, as it increases the cost significantly without
providing added benefits in regions away from the contact. Additionally, it undermines
one of the key strengths of isogeometric analysis (IGA), which is the ability to represent
geometries with high accuracy, even with coarse meshes. Therefore, it is necessary to
develop a method that overcomes the limitations of uniform order elevation in NURBS
discretized geometries and enhances the performance of IGA in computational contact
mechanics.
To address the above challenges, this work introduces a varying-order (VO) NURBS
discretization method, building upon the two-dimensional VO approach in [1]. The
proposed method allows user-defined higher-order NURBS basis functions to be applied
specifically for contact integrals, while the bulk computations use the minimum-order
NURBS that still represent the contact geometry accurately. This way, VO discretization
enables the application of order elevation-based refinement in a controlled manner for
isogeometric analysis. In the following, the theory of the proposed method is detailed
for tri-variate NURBS constructed geometry. Next, in Section 3.2, some remarks on
integrating the proposed method into the standard NURBS-based IGA framework are
given to summarize its implementation aspect.
3.1 Three-dimensional VO NURBS discretization
The basic concept of the varying order NURBS discretization method for a contact
geometry in three-dimension is illustrated in Fig. 3. Let p1,p2, and p3 are the minimum
interpolation order of the NURBS functions that are capable of accurately representing
the given three-dimensional CAD geometry exactly. The coarsest mesh is given by the
tensor product of the knot vectors defined along theξ1,ξ2, andξ3 parametric directions,
14
i.e. Ξ 1× Ξ2× Ξ3. In the proposed method, the original minimum-order of NURBS
discretized contact boundary surface, which is defined along the ξ1 and ξ2 parametric
directions, is replaced with a new higher-order p1c > p1 and p2c > p2 NURBS surface
such that it matches the volume parametrization as shown in Fig. 3.
The new contact boundary surface of three-dimensional geometry can be con-
structed either using the k−refinement or with a combination of k−refinement and
order elevation-based approaches, which, as a result, increase the inter-element continu-
ity or interpolation order of NURBS on the contact surface. Thus, such a discretization
enables the usage of higher-continuous and higher-order NURBS as basis functions for
the computation of the quantities on the contact surface, while the minimum order of
NURBS is utilized for the computation of the volume region that does not come into
contact.
The tri-variate NURBS basis functions for a VO discretized three-dimensional con-
tact element are defined as
Rpc1,pc2,p3
1 (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) := w111
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3)N1,pc1(ξ1)N1,pc2(ξ2)N1,p3(ξ3),
... ...
Rpc1,pc2,p3
(pc1+1)(pc2+1)(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) := w(pc1+1)(pc2+1)1
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) Npc1+1,pc1(ξ1)Npc2+1,pc2(ξ2)N1,p3(ξ3),
Rpc1,pc2,p3
(pc1+1)(pc2+1)+1(ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) := w112
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3)N1,pc1(ξ1)N1,pc2(ξ2)N2,p3(ξ3),
... ...
Rpc1,pc2,p3
necp (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) := w(pc1+1)(pc2+1)2
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) Npc1+1,pc1(ξ1)Npc2+1,pc2(ξ2)N2,p3(ξ3),
(25)
where ne
cp = (pc1 + 1)× (pc2 + 1) + (p1 + 1)× (p2 + 1)×p3 denotes the total number of
basis functions having local support in a VO based NURBS discretized contact element
in 3D and the normalizing weight function is defined as
W (ξ1,ξ 2,ξ 3) =
(pc1+1)X
i=1
(pc2+1)X
j=1
wij1Ni,pc1(ξ1)Nj,pc2(ξ2)N1,p3(ξ3)
+
(p1+1)X
i=1
(p2+1)X
j=1
wij2Ni,p1(ξ1)Nj,p2(ξ2)N2,p3(ξ3).
(26)
The tri-variate NURBS functions defined in Eqs. 25 exhibit the non-negativity prop-
15
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Schematic illustration of the standard and VO-based NURBS discretization of an
example tri-variate geometry. (a) Standard NURBS discretization with minimum p1 =p2 = 2
andp3 = 1 order NURBS along theξ1,ξ2, andξ3 parametric directions at a given mesh, where
Ξ1 = Ξ2 = [0, 0, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5], and Ξ3 = [0, 0, 1, 2, 2]. (b) VO NURBS discretization, where
the higher-order NURBS, i.e. N 2·1 are used for the description of the contact surface in both
the ξ1 and ξ2 parametric direction, and the minimum N 2 NURBS in its remaining volume.
16
erty
Rpc1,pc2,p3
a (ξ)≥ 0 ∀ξ∈ Ωe
c where a = 1, 2,...,n e
cp, (27)
and also satisfy the partition of unity property
ne
cpX
a=1
Rpc1,pc2,p3
a (ξ) = 1, ∀ξ∈ Ωe
c. (28)
Since in the present work,p1c =p2c =pc is taken in the considered numerical exam-
ples, the following notation is used for the VO-based NURBS discretization N p−Npc·ps,
where Np is interpolation order of the NURBS used for the discretization of the volume,
and Npc is for the contact surface. Moreover, the subscript ps denotes the step number
of order elevation applied to the N pc discretized contact surface.
Using the isoparametric concept, the same NURBS functions that are defined in
Eq. (25) for a VO discretized contact element are employed for the approximation of
the unknown displacement field ue, its variation δue, and to determine the current
coordinatesxe within each VO based NURBS discretized contact element Ω e
c as
ue = Re(ξ) ue, δ ue = Re(ξ)δue, xe = Re(ξ) xe ∀ξ∈ Ωe
c. (29)
Here, the new basis function arrayR(ξ) is defined in a similar fashion to Eq. (19), except
the modification that now it contains a total ne
cp = (pc1 + 1)× (pc2 + 1) + (p1 + 1)× (p2 +
1)×p3 number of trivariate NURBS functions Rpc1,pc2,p3
a (ξ) (25) having local support in
a VO NURBS discretized contact element Ωe
c. Moreover, the basis function array for the
slave and master contact surface Rke in Eq. (23) makes use of bivariate Rpc1,pc2
a (ξ1,ξ 2)
NURBS functions for the evaluation of contact integrals in three-dimensions.
3.2 Implementation details
For integrating the VO NURBS discretization strategy into the standard NURBS-based
isogeometric framework, only a few minor modifications are required. First of all, for
a given mesh resolution, a pc order of NURBS surface representing the contact surface
of a NURBS-described solid is constructed. After that, the parametrization for an
originally p order of NURBS discretized contact surface is replaced with that of the
newly constructed pc order of NURBS surface. For this, a certain number of conditions
need to be fulfilled. The total number of control points defining the solid must be
17
updated in such a manner that it allows the incorporation of the newly constructed pc
order of the new contact surface. This means that the connectivity array for contact
elements must be adapted in a way that it contains the underlying control points of
the VO-based discretized geometry. The derived contact element connectivity arrays
can have a different length than the bulk element connectivity arrays. The trivariate
NURBS basis functions defined in Eq. (25) are used for the evaluation of elemental
quantities for VO-based NURBS described contact elements, while for the evaluation
of the contact surface integrals, the standard bivariate pc order of NURBS, functions
are utilized. Except for these modifications, no other changes need to be made in the
standard NURBS-based isogeometric framework. The local quantities, e.g. elemental
tangent matrices and force vectors, are assembled to their global part in the same way
as with the standard procedure. However, new control point connectivity arrays need to
be utilized. In this work, a default (pc +1) number of Gauss-Legendre quadrature points
in each parametric direction is employed to evaluate the contact integrals unless stated
otherwise. For the bulk, ( p + 1) number of quadrature points along each parametric
direction are utilized. Optimal quadrature rules [62–64], which are well-suited for IGA,
can also be opted for the reduced numerical evaluation. However, their application lies
outside the scope of the present work.
4 Numerical Examples
In this section, we demonstrate the performance of the proposed varying-order-based
NURBS discretization method for 3D large deformation contact problems, both with
or without friction. The method’s efficacy is assessed in terms of accuracy, robustness,
and computational efficiency. For comparison, results obtained using the widely utilized
standard N2-based NURBS discretization in IGA are also included. It is noted that in
this study, the interpolation order of NURBS is kept the same, i.e., p =q.
4.1 Patch Test
The contact patch test, originally introduced in [11], is a benchmark used to evaluate
whether a contact algorithm can exactly transmit a uniform pressure field across the
contact interface. Algorithms that fail this test introduce errors in the result at the
interface, which may not diminish with the mesh refinement [65].
In this example, we examine the relative error in the vertical contact stress for the
18
Figure 4: Patch test: setup including the loading and coarsest mesh used for the cubes.
considered GPTS isogeometric contact algorithm while varying both the mesh resolution
and the number of quadrature points at the interface. The setup involves a frictionless
contact between two cubes of identical dimensions, [Lx,Ly,Lz] = [1, 1, 1] mm with non-
conforming meshes at their interface, as shown in Fig. 4. A uniform contact pressure,
pN = 1 N/mm 2 is applied on the top surface of the upper cube, while the bottom
surface of the lower cube is constrained against the vertical direction. Both bodies are
modeled as isotropic, and linear elastic material is considered, with E = 1 N/mm 2
and ν = 0.3. The penalty parameter is set to ϵN = 100E. Three successively refined
meshes, containing [3, 6, 12] and [2, 5, 11] number of quadratic NURBS elements N 2 in
each direction for the lower and upper cubes, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 5. In
all the cases, the upper body is always set as the slave body, while the lower one is the
master body. For the evaluation of the contact integral, we use ngp = (p + 1), 4∗ (p + 1),
and 200 Gauss-Legendre integration points in each direction in each element.
Figure 5 illustrates the error in the vertical contact stress over the different meshes
and quadrature points. The results show that the error decreases only with increasing
the number of quadrature points while remaining nearly unaffected by mesh resolution
or interpolation order (not shown here) at a fixed number of quadrature points. Thus,
the considered GPTS algorithm passes the contact patch test within the quadrature
accuracy. Based on the patch test results, we set 4( p + 1) as the default number of
quadrature points for the evaluation of contact integral along each parametric direction
of theNp discretized NURBS contact layer in the subsequent analysis to ensure numerical
19
ngp = (p + 1)
 ngp = 4(p + 1)
 ngp = 200
;
Figure 5: Patch test: Error in the vertical stress for GPTS contact algorithm over different
meshes but at a fix number of quadrature points (column-wise), and with varying the number
of quadrature points at a fixed mesh (row-wise).
20
efficiency.
4.2 Hertzian contact problem
(a)
 (b)
Figure 6: Hertzian contact: (a) 1/8th of the NURBS constructed sphere with the redistributed
coarsest mesh, and (b) enlarged view of the mesh in the contact zone.
The second examples considers the Hertzian contact problem between an elastic
sphere and a rigid plane, as illustrated in Fig. 6a. This example is used to evaluate
the performance of the 3D varying order NURBS discretization method in capturing
the contact pressure distribution at a fixed mesh, compared to the standard N 2 NURBS
discretization. The geometry of the problem, boundary conditions, and material param-
eters are taken from De Lorenzis et al. [55].
The sphere, having the outer radius Ro = 1 mm, is made of a linear elastic mate-
rial with Young’s modulus E = 1 N/mm 2 and Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3. The penalty
parameterϵN = 5× 103 is set as the default value. It is noted that the natural NURBS-
based construction of the 1 /8 of the sphere includes an internal spherical surface with
an inner radius Ri = 0.8 mm. Numerical experimentations verified that this internal
radius does not influence the accuracy of the results. In the classical Hertz problem,
a uniform normal pressure distribution is applied on the equatorial plane of the hemi-
sphere. However, in this case, due to the presence of an internal spherical surface, a
uniform vertical displacement is applied to its top surface, as in [1]. For the compar-
ative convergence analysis, five progressive refined meshes, driven by 12 n× 24 number
21
of elements along the angular and radial directions, where n = [1, 2, 4, 8, 16], denoted
as m1 to m5. Numerical tests confirmed that the 24 number of redistributed elements
along the radial direction is sufficient to obtain accurate results for this example. For
numerical efficiency purposes, the mesh is redistributed such that approximately 75%
number of elements are concentrated within the 10% of the total length of knot vectors
defined in both directions, as illustrated for mesh m1 in Fig. 6.
It is worth noting that due to the axial symmetry of the problem, the contact pressure
distribution can readily be obtained from a simplified 2D setup. However, this study
primarily evaluates the performance of the VO NURBS discretization in capturing the
contact pressure distribution in the 3D setting compared to the standard NURBS dis-
cretization. The same analysis was presented by De Lorenzis et al. [55], which used the
standard NURBS discretization with mortar contact elements.
Figure 7: Hertzian contact: Distribution of the contact pressure for different VO and standard
NURBS discretization at mesh m3. The result with N 2 at a fine mesh is used as a reference.
Figure 7 qualitatively compares the dimensionless contact pressure distribution for
VO-based N2-N2·1 and N 2-N2·2 with the standard N 2 discretization at an intermediate
meshm3. As can be observed, at a fixed mesh, VO-based discretizations deliver superior
quality results compared to the standard N 2 discretization. This is because the pressure
curves are closer to the reference solution. This improvement stems from the increased
number of DOFs available with VO discretization at the contact surface than N 2, as
detailed in Table 1. A closer examination reveals a slight improvement in the quality
of the result when the interpolation order of NURBS is increased at the contact surface
22
within the VO setting, i.e., from N 2-N2·1 to N2-N2·2.
Discretization Type Mesh Interface Bulk Total
N2 588 14112 14700
N2-N2·1 m1 2028 14112 16140
N2-N2·2 4332 14112 18444
N2 2028 48672 50700
N2-N2·1 m2 7500 48672 56172
N2-N2·2 16428 48672 65100
N2 7500 180000 187500
N2-N2·1 m3 28812 180000 208812
N2-N2·2 63948 180000 243948
N2 28812 691488 720300
N2-N2·1 m4 112908 691488 804396
N2-N2·2 252300 691488 943788
N2 112908 2709792 2822700
N2-N2·1 m5 446988 2709792 3156780
N2-N2·2 1002252 2709792 3712044
T able 1: Hertzian contact: DOF distribution across the contact interface and bulk with the
different VO and standard NURBS discretizations.
Next, fig. 8 illustrates the convergence of the L2-norm error in normalized contact
pressure for these discretizations. The L2-norm error at each mesh level is computed
using||epN||L2 =
qR
Γc
[¯pNref− ¯pN]2 dΓ , where the reference solution is obtained at suf-
ficiently fine mesh, containing approx. 6.4 million of DOFs with N 2 discretization.
For unilateral contact problems, the spatial convergence rate of the displacement field
is theoretically limited to O(h3/2) in the energy norm upon uniform mesh refinement
when using second-order contact elements. This limitation arises due to the reduced
regularity of the contact solution, as discussed in detail in Popp et al. [66] and Seitz et
al. [37]. In the current work, as mentioned earlier, the loading on the top surface of the
sphere is prescribed via displacement field rather than pressure due to the presence of an
internal spherical surface. Consequently, we analyze the convergence of the L2-norm of
the contact pressure error, which differs from displacement-based convergence estimates
such asH1-norm. Our findings indicate that the convergence rate of this error is slightly
below thanO(h3/2) for both the standard and VO-based NURBS discretizations. This
deviation may stem from the large mesh size associated with the numerical reference
solution, i.e. pNref, which is limited by our computational resources.
23
From fig. 8, it is evident that the error curve with the VO discretization consistently
lies below that of the standard N 2 discretization, demonstrating improved accuracy
at each mesh level. Notably, the accuracy with N 2-N2·1 at mesh m2, m3, and m4 is
comparable to that with N 2 at next finer meshes, i.e. m3, m4, and m5, respectively.
This indicates that VO-based N 2-N2·1 achieves similar accuracy while requiring approx.
3.5 times fewer DOFs than N 2, see Table 1 for DOF details. This significant reduction
in DOFs translates to a considerable gain in computational efficiency.
Additionally, the error values obtained with N 2-N2·2 are only marginally better that
those with N 2-N2·1. This indicates that increasing the number of DOFs at the contact
surface, as in N 2-N2·2, may not be useful, as it provides only marginal improvement in
the accuracy, making the use of additional DOFs than N 2-N2·1 difficult to justify.
4.3 Frictional Ironing with finite deformations
4.3.1 Setup
This example considers a 3D frictional sliding contact between an indentor-slab pair un-
dergoing large deformations. The setup of the problem, which is adapted from Temizer
et al. [58], is shown in Fig. 9. We simulate this example in two overall stages. In the first
(a)
 (b)
Figure 8: Hertzian contact: convergence of theL2-norm based error in the normalized contact
pressure distribution with (a) total DOFs and (b) element size for both the standard and VO-
based NURBS discretizations.
24
one, the elastic indentor having a spherical-shaped contact surface and geometrical di-
mension [20, 20, 16] mm is pressed against an elastic slab of size [Lx,Ly,Lz] = [80, 28, 21]
mm by applying the vertical displacement Uz =−7 mm on its top surface with 70 uni-
form load steps. In the second stage, the indentor is dragged across the slab by applying
horizontal displacement Ux = 54 mm on its top surface with uniform 540 load steps.
Note that during the dragging process, the vertical displacement is kept constant. To
avoid the physical fold-in effect at the leading contact surface during the dragging pro-
cess, Coulomb’s friction coefficient µ = 0.1 is used as in [58]. The foundation of the slab
is fixed in all the displacement directions. An isotropic Neo-Hookean material behavior
is considered for both bodies, where Young’s modulus is E = 100 N/mm 2 for the in-
dentor and E = 1 N/mm 2 for the slab, and the same Poisson’s ratio ν = 0.3 for both.
The penalty parameters are taken as ϵN = ϵT = 100 N/mm and are scaled with the
minimum element size. The coarsest mesh used for the indentor and slab is shown in
Fig. 9. Other nested meshes that are obtained through the uniform knot insertion and
considered for the convergence analysis are listed in Table 2.
The deformed configurations of the setup at different simulation instances are shown
in Fig. 10 with quadratic NURBS discretizations at mesh m 2. Here, the half-view of
Figure 9: Frictional ironing: Setup and the coarsest mesh considered for the indentor and
slab. The control points and knot entries are shown with red dots and black squares for N 2
with mesh m 1.
25
Mesh Elements
Indentor Slab
m1 5× 5× 3 12× 4× 3
m2 10× 10× 4 24× 8× 6
m3 20× 20× 5 48× 16× 12
T able 2: Frictional ironing: Elements with different meshes.
the setup is shown to provide better visuals of the contact surface deformation and the
stress developed within the interior of the bulk domain.
4.3.2 Performance at a fixed mesh
First, we show the performance of the proposed method at the coarsest mesh level m 1
for the considered example. Figure 11 illustrates the evolution of the total normal and
frictional contact forces, computed at the top surface of the indentor as a function of
prescribed displacement with different standard and VO NURBS-based discretizations.
The results indicate that the evolution of the contact forces appears similar to that of
different NURBS discretizations. Even though the contact surface is discretized using
the C1-continuous NURBS, the oscillation error in contact forces is noticeable, particu-
larly during the dragging phase. The origin of these oscillations lies in the inadequate
discretization of the contact layers, e.g. when using a coarse mesh and/or lower interpo-
lation order of basis functions. This limitation hinders the contact layer from adequately
conforming to the finite deformations of the bodies involved. However, at a fixed mesh,
IGA provides the possibility to enhance the conforming ability of contact layers through
the use of higher-order NURBS functions. However, using a fine mesh or higher-order
NURBS in the region away from the contact surface may not be desirable as a substantial
computational cost is associated with bulk computations.
To illustrate the performance of our VO discretization over the standard NURBS
discretizations, the enlarged views of the normal and horizontal contact forces are pro-
vided in Figs. 12a and 12b. For quantitative analysis, the reduction in the oscillation
error with VO discretizations w.r.t. to popular standard N 2 is provided in Table 3 for
both the reaction forces. Here, we use: ∆ Pj := max(Pj)− min(Pj), where j =z, andx
to compute the oscillation amplitude at the fixed mesh. Moreover, the total DOFs asso-
ciated with the contact surface and remaining bulk domain of each solid with different
discretizations are listed in Table 4.
26
(a)
 (b)
(c)
 (d)
(e)
 (f )
Figure 10: Frictional ironing: Deformed configuration of the setup at the vertical indentation:
(a) 0.05 mm, (b) 3.5 mm, and (c) 7 mm during the compression stage, and at (d) 18 mm, (e)
36 mm, and (f) 54 mm during the dragging stage. The color shows the distribution of stress
σ33. The control points and knot entries with N 2 at mesh m 2 are shown with red dots and
black squares.
27
Figure 11: Frictional ironing: Evolution of total vertical and frictional contact forces over
prescribed displacement with different NURBS discretizations.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 12: Frictional ironing: Enlarged view of (a) normal and (b) frictional contact forces
with the VO and standard NURBS discretizations at mesh m 1.
28
Discretization ∆Pz (%) ∆Px (%)
Type
N2 100 100
N4 74.64 68.75
N5 84.54 83.95
N2−N2·1 79.97 93.16
N2−N2·2 95.40 98.22
T able 3: Frictional ironing: Reduction in the oscillation amplitude of the normal and frictional
contact forces with different standard and VO NURBS discretizations at m 1. The result with
N2 is used as a reference.
Discretization DOFs for indentor DOFs for slab Total
Type Interface Bulk Total Interface Bulk Total DOF
N2 147 441 588 252 756 1008 1596
N4 243 729 972 384 1152 1536 2508
N5 300 900 1200 459 1377 1836 3036
N2-N2·1 432 441 873 780 756 1536 2409
N2-N2·2 867 441 1308 1596 756 2352 3660
T able 4: Frictional ironing: DOFs details for the indentor and slab for different VO and
standard NURBS-based discretizations at mesh m 1.
Based on the obtained results, the following three key observations are drawn. First,
the VO NURBS-based discretization, specifically N 2−Npc (pc = 2· 1, and 2· 2) achieves
a substantial improvement in accuracy by reducing the oscillation amplitude of forces
compared to the N2 based NURBS discretization. Specifically, N2−N2·1 achieves approx.
80% and 93% reduction in the oscillation amplitude of the normal and frictional contact
forces relative to N 2. Second, while the employment of higher-continuous NURBS dis-
cretization N 5 improves the accuracy over N 2 at the fixed mesh, N 2−N2·1 still delivers
the results with superior accuracy. This improvement with the VO NURBS is attributed
to the large number of the DOFs that are additionally present on the contact surface
and moderate multi-knot span support of the higher-order basis function, as compared
to the standard discretizations. The third observation is that further increasing the
interpolation order of the NURBS for the contact layer, as in N 2−N2·2 results in only
a marginal improvement in accuracy over N 2−N2·1. In other words, this suggests that
adding more number of the DOFs for the contact surface than N 2−N2·1 offers only a
slight improvement in the accuracy.
29
4.3.3 Convergence analysis
(a)
 (b)
Figure 13: Frictional ironing: Enlarged view of (1) normal and (b) frictional contact forces
with the VO and standard NURBS discretizations at mesh m 2..
Next, we analyze the mesh convergence of the normal and horizontal contact forces
for both the VO and standard NURBS discretizations. For this, the resolution of the
coarsest mesh for the indentor and slab is uniformly increased, as given in Table 2 with
the uniform knot insertion along each parametric direction. The reduction in the oscil-
lation amplitude of the normal and frictional contact forces with different discretizations
at mesh level m2 is illustrated in Figs. 13a and Figs. 13b. As shown, the obtained results
demonstrate the consistent performance of the VO NURBS over the standard uniform
NURBS discretizations. Such a consistent gain in accuracy aligns with the observations
made at mesh level m 1 with the VO and standard discretizations.
The convergence plots for both the normal and frictional contact force oscillation
amplitude over total DOFs with mesh refinement are presented in Figs. 14a and 14b. It
can be seen that VO discretization offers significant accuracy improvement compared to
the standard NURBS discretization at the same mesh level. A closer look reveals that
the accuracy obtained with N 2−N2·1 at mesh levels m 1 and m2 is comparable to results
with N 2 at subsequent finer meshes m 2 and m 3. For this, N 2−N2·1 takes approx. 3 .2
and 4.1 times fewer DOFs, leading to a considerable gain in computational efficiency.
Furthermore, the higher-order VO discretization, N 2−N2·2 yields a slight improvement
30
in the accuracy compared to N 2−N2·1 at the same mesh level.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 14: Frictional ironing: Convergence of the oscillation amplitude of the (a) normal and
(b) frictional contact forces for different VO and standard NURBS discretizations upon mesh
refinement.
4.4 Twisting contact between a hemisphere and a cube
In this section, we show the performance of the VO discretization method using a chal-
lenging 3D benchmark: twisting contact between a deformable hemisphere and a cube,
as introduced in [44, 45]. We first analyze the frictionless twisting scenario to showcase
the capability of the method to handle pure normal contact in 3D. In the subsequent
example, friction is included, resulting in a more complex interaction involving frictional
sticking and sliding, in addition to normal contact during twisting. This progression
allows us to assess the robustness of the method in handling complex contact scenarios.
4.4.1 Frictionless Twisting
The setup of the problem, which involves a hollow hemisphere having an outer radius
L/2 mm and an inner radius L/3 mm, and a cube of size [ L×L×L], where L = 2
mm is shown in Fig. 15a. In this benchmark problem, the hemisphere is first pressed
into a cube by applying the prescribed vertical downward displacement of Uz = L/2
mm to all the control points on the ring-shaped top surface of the hemisphere. The ver-
31
(a)
 (b)
Figure 15: Setup for both the frictionless and frictional twisting contact. (a) Geometry and
finest mesh for the hemisphere and cube. (b) Deformed configuration of the setup at the end
of compression.
tical displacement is then held constant in the subsequent frictionless rotation of 180 o
applied around the vertical axis in uniform load steps. The foundation of the cube is
held stationary by fixing displacement in all directions. A Neo-Hookean hyper-elastic
material model is considered with material properties: E = 5 N/mm2 for the hemisphere
and E = 1 N/mm 2 for the cube, and Poisson’s ration ν = 0.3 for both. Three nested
meshes that are obtained with the uniform knot insertion along each parametric direc-
tion are summarised in Table 5. The penalty parameter used for enforcing the normal
contact constraint is also included in Table 5 with each mesh level. Fig. 15a depicted
the finest mesh used for the setup. Further, as can be seen, the exact NURBS-based
construction of the hemisphere consists of degenerated triangle elements at its two polar
points. However, it noted that those degenerated elements do not negatively affect the
accuracy of the result as the displacement of the degenerated points is obtained with
the prescribed Dirichlet boundary condition. Moreover, the NURBS-based construction
of the hemisphere enables the achievement of the required C 1-continuity across the con-
tact surface with N 2 based discretization. The DOFs over the contact surface and bulk
domain of the hemisphere and cube with each NURBS discretization at different meshes
are provided in Table 6. Furthermore, the deformed configuration of the setup at the
end of the compression of the hemisphere against the cube is shown in Fig. 15b.
32
Mesh Elements ϵN
Hemisphere Cube
m1 4× 4× 2 2× 2× 2 100
m2 8× 8× 3 4× 4× 4 200
m3 16× 16× 4 8× 8× 8 400
T able 5: Elements with three meshes used for hemisphere and cube along with the penalty
parameter at each mesh for both frictionless and frictional twisting.
First, we show the performance of the proposed method at a very coarse mesh.
The evolution of torque computed around the rotation axis over the prescribed rotation
angle with VO discretizations is shown in Fig. 16a at the mesh level m1. The result with
the most popular standard N 2 based discretization is also included for the comparative
assessment. Considering the frictionless twisting, theoretically, the torque should be zero
for the prescribed rotation angles. However, as noted above, such non-physical oscillation
of torque, as can be seen from Fig. 16a, stems from using insufficient resolution for the
contact surface, even if it is constructed with the required C1-continuous NURBS. One of
the most common practices to alleviate such a numerical error in the contact responses
is to use a finer mesh. At a fixed mesh, the employment of higher-order basis functions
offered by IGA can also lead to the reduction of such errors. However, using the finer
mesh or standard higher-order NURBS functions in the region away from the contact
Discretization Mesh DOFs for hemisphere DOFs for cube Total
Type Interface Bulk Total Interface Bulk Total DOF
N2 m1 147 294 441 48 96 144 585
N2-N2·1 m1 363 294 657 108 96 204 861
N2-N2·2 m1 675 294 969 192 96 288 1257
N2 m2 363 1089 1452 108 432 540 1992
N2-N2·1 m2 1083 1089 2172 300 432 732 2904
N2-N2·2 m2 2187 1089 3276 588 432 1020 4296
N2 m3 1083 4332 5415 300 2400 2700 8115
N2-N2·1 m3 3675 4332 8007 972 2400 3372 11379
N2-N2·2 m3 7803 4332 12135 2028 2400 4428 16563
T able 6: DOFs details over the contact surface and in volume of the hemisphere and cube
for different VO and standard NURBS-based discretizations at three nested meshes for both
frictionless and frictional twisting contact.
33
(a)
 (b)
Figure 16: Frictionaless twisting contact: Variation of torque around the vertical axis of the
setup over prescribed twisting angle for different VO and standard NUBRS discretization at
mesh (a) m 1 and (b) m 2.
surface may not be required, specifically the higher-order NURBS, due to their higher
computational cost.
From Fig. 16a, it can be observed that the VO-based N 2−N2·1 discretization is able
to capture the torque more accurately as compared to N 2 at the very coarse mesh. It
reduces the amplitude error in torque by approx. 73% over N 2 at mesh m1. Such a gain
in accuracy with VO is attributed to the additional DOFs present at the contact surface.
Another observation is that although the application of further higher-order NURBS,
i.e. N 2−N2·2 at the contact surface further improves the accuracy of the torque, the gain
is marginal as it reduces amplitude error by only approx. 11% over N 2−N2·1. Hence, as
also observed in the frictional sliding example, using more number of DOFs for contact
surface than with N 2−N2·1 is not useful, as it yields only a marginal gain in accuracy at
a fixed mesh.
Next, we illustrate the performance of the VO discretizations at a finer mesh, m 2
in Fig. 16b. It is evident that the VO discretization, specifically N 2−N2·1, showcases
superior performance over N 2 at mesh m 2. It is consistent with the observation made
at mesh m 1 for VO compared to N 2. Another observation is that, at this mesh, the
accuracy of the result obtained with N 2−N2·2 becomes comparable to N 2−N2·1, hence
34
supporting the argument that more DOFs than obtained with N 2−N2·1 are not useful,
as N 2−N2·2 only marginally improves the accuracy of the contact response at a fixed
mesh.
Figure 17: Frictionaless twisting contact: Convergence of the amplitude error in the torque
with different VO and standard NURBS discretization upon mesh refinement.
Finally, we investigate the convergence behavior of the reduction in the oscillation
amplitude of the torque with different discretizations upon mesh refinement. Fig. 17
shows the convergence plots for the VO and standard NURBS-based discretization. It
can be observed that VO discretization clearly outperforms standard NURBS discretiza-
tion at the same mesh level. Specifically, to attain the accuracy similar to N 2 at meshes
m2 and m3, N2−N2·1 uses approx. 2.32 and 2.79 times fewer number of DOFs. The VO
discretization, thus, takes lower computational efforts in terms of the DOFs over the
standard N2 based NURBS discretization.
4.4.2 Twisting with friction
In this example, we use the same problem setup as in the previous one, except that
frictional contact is additionally considered between the hemisphere and cube during the
twisting. It is noted that during the downward vertical displacement of the hemisphere,
frictionless contact is still assumed as in [45]. Following [45], a high coefficient of friction
µ = 0.5 is applied at the interface, which leads to large shear deformation in both the
contact surfaces and the interior of the bulk domains. As in the previous example,
35
the normal penalty parameter ϵN is scaled in proportion to the average element length,
and correspondingly, the tangential penalty parameter is set as ϵT = ϵN at each mesh
level. The same VO and standard NURBS discretization types, outlined in Table 6 for
frictionless twisting, are employed here. It is also noted that at the onset of the twisting
of the hemisphere, when θ = 0o, all the contact points on the interface are considered
to be in the sticking state, as per in [45].
Figure 18: Frictional twisting contact: Deformed configurations of the setup (bottom row)
and its top view (top row) at rotation angle θ = 0o, 30o, 60o and 180o (from left to right).
Figure 18 illustrates the deformed configurations of the setup at various rotation an-
gles. As evident, the high friction coefficient induces a significant shift in the frictional
contact behavior. At the onset of twisting, when θ = 0o, the contact regions predomi-
nantly experience sticking due to the high resistance to the tangential motion. However,
as the rotation progresses, the transition to slipping of the contact points occurs, and
approx. after θ = 100o, slipping becomes the dominant behavior in the contact regions.
This shift aligns with the observations in [45], where the same frictional effects were
noted under such a high friction coefficient.
Figures. 19a and 19b show the evolution of the twisting torques over the applied
rotation angles with different NURBS discretizations at mesh levels m 1 and m 2. The
result obtained with N2 discretization at m2 agrees with that of Corbett and Sauer [45].
36
It can be observed that up to the prescribed rotation angle, approx.θ = 100o, the torque
around the vertical axis increases continuously due to the transition of the contact region
from the sticking to the slipping. After this transition, once full slipping is achieved, the
torque is expected to stabilize at a constant maximum value for the remainder of the
twisting process.
(a)
 (b)
Figure 19: Frictional twisting contact: Evolution of total torque over the prescribed rotation
angle with the VO and standard NURBS discretizations at mesh (a) m 1 and (b) m 2.
However, as seen from Figs. 19a and 19b, the standard N 2 based NURBS discretiza-
tion yields a poor approximation of the torque, exhibiting both an underestimation of
the average value of torque and non-physical oscillation. These inaccuracies arise from
using a coarse mesh, which limits the ability of N 2 to accurately capture the contact
responses. In contrast, the VO-based N 2−N2·1 discretization, although slightly over-
predicts the average torque value at mesh m 1, it significantly improves the accuracy. It
reduces the deviation of the average torque value by approx. 82% and 79% compared to
N2 discretization at mesh levels m 1 and m2. Furthermore, applying the N 2−N2·2 at the
same mesh level enhances accuracy only marginally compared to N 2−N2·1, consistent
with the observations from the previous two examples.
Next, the convergence of the maximum deviation of the torque is examined for various
discretizations across three different meshes: m 1, m2, and m3, as summarized in Table 5.
Figure 20 illustrates the convergences of the deviation of the maximum average value
of torque for the N 2, N2−N2·1, as well as N 2−N2·2. As shown, all discretizations exhibit
37
reduced torque deviation with increasing mesh resolution, and the convergence rates
remain nearly the same for different discretizations. Notably, N 2−N2·1 accomplishes
much higher accurate results than N 2 at a fixed mesh resolution.
Figure 20: Frictional twisting contact: Convergence of the maximum deviation of the average
torque with mesh refinement for VO and standard NURBS discretizations.
A closer look reveals that the result obtained with N 2−N2·1 at the first two mesh
levels m1 and m 2 closely matches with those of N 2 at subsequent finer mesh levels m 2
and m 3. To gain such an improvement in the accuracy, N 2−N2·1 takes approx. 2 .2
and 2.7 times fewer DOFs than N 2, demonstrating a substantial gain in computational
efficiency. Such a gain in the computational efficiency with the VO-based discretization
is consistent with the trends observed in the previous two examples.
5 Conclusions
For the accurate, robust, and efficient treatment of three-dimensional large deformation
frictional contact using IGA, this work extends the VO-based NURBS discretization
method from [1] to three dimensions. The central feature of the proposed method is that
it enables controllable order elevation of a NURBS discretized tri-variate geometry such
that the higher-order NURBS are used only for the evaluation of the contact integrals,
while the minimum order of NURBS for the computation in the remaining of the 3D
bulk domain, without the loss of the advantageous features of the IGA technique.
38
In this work, we combine the Gauss-point-to-surface contact algorithm with the
presented method to develop a simple yet computationally efficient technique for isoge-
ometric contact analysis. Within the presented formulation, the penalty method is used
to regularize the contact constraints, and the normal and sticking contact constraints
are enforced independently at each quadrature point. The results demonstrate that
the proposed VO NURBS discretization yields much more accurate results, even at a
very coarse mesh, when compared to the widely popular standard N 2 based NURBS
discretization. Specifically, the contact responses obtained with the VO discretization
exhibit minimal oscillatory response at a fixed mesh with respect to the standard N 2
discretization. Moreover, we show that to attain an accuracy similar to N 2, VO uses
much lower DOFs, hence considerably enhancing the computational efficiency of the
IGA technique for the 3D small and large deformation contact problem with or with-
out considering friction. This gain in efficiency is attributed to the use of higher-order
NURBS in the contact region, which increases the conforming ability of the contact sur-
face, enabling more accurate capture of both the normal and tangential contact forces
even at a coarse mesh. Additionally, the obtained results show that further increasing
the interpolation order of NURBS for the contact region with VO yields only marginal
improvements in the accuracy, suggesting that VO-based N2-N2·1 discretization offers an
optimal balance between the accuracy and computational efficiency. Furthermore, the
simplicity of the proposed method facilitates its direct integration into the standard IGA
framework with minimum modifications. Future work focuses on extending the capa-
bilities of the presented method to more complex contact scenarios, such as self-contact
and dynamic contact involving large deformation and frictional sliding.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to gratefully acknowledge the anonymous reviewers for their crit-
ical comments and valuable suggestions, which have significantly improved the quality
of the manuscript.
Declaration of competing interest
The corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.
39
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Appendix: Tangent matrices for frictional contact
In this section, we provide the contact tangent matrices that are obtained from the
linearization of the contact force vectors fke
c given in Sec. (2.4.2). The final expressions
of the contact tangent matrices in the framework of IGA are given by
ksse
c := ∂f se
c
∂use =−
Z
Γsec
(Rse)T ∂tc
∂use dΓ−
Z
Γsc
(Rse)Ttc⊗ τα
s Rse
,α dΓ, α ={1, 2}
ksme
c := ∂f se
c
∂ume =
Z
Γsec
(Rse)T ∂tc
∂ume dΓ
(30)
kmse
c := ∂f me
c
∂use =
Z
Γsec
(Rme
,α )Tts⊗ ∂ ¯ξα
m
∂use dΓ
+
Z
Γsec
(Rme)T ∂tc
∂use dΓ +
Z
Γsc
(Rme)Ttc⊗ τα
s Rse
,α dΓ
kmme
c := ∂f me
c
∂ume =
Z
Γsc
(Rme
,α )Ttc⊗ ∂ ¯ξα
m
∂ume dΓ +
Z
Γsc
(Rme)T ∂tc
∂ume dΓ.
Here, Rse = Rse(ξs) and Rme = Rme( ¯ξm), and following [50]
∂ ¯ξα
m
∂use = ∂ ¯ξα
m
∂xse
∂xse
∂use = ¯cαβ ¯τβ Rse. (31)
In the above equation, the contravariant components ¯cαβ
m of a tensor cm are computed
using
[¯cαβ] =

¯mαβ− gN ¯kαβ
−1
. (32)
The derivative∂ ¯ξα
m/∂ume is given as [49]
∂ ¯ξα
m
∂ume =−¯cαβ ¯τβ Rme− gN ¯n Rme
,β

, (33)
The partial derivatives of the total contact traction is given as
∂tc
∂uke = ∂tN
∂uke− ∂tT
∂uke, where k ={s, m}. (34)
40
For normal contact, the derivatives of the contact traction are given as
∂tN
∂use =−ϵN¯n∂gN
∂use−ϵN gN
∂¯n
∂use,
∂tN
∂ume =−ϵN¯n ∂gN
∂ume−ϵN gN
∂¯n
∂ume.
(35)
For tangential stick, the partial derivatives of tangential contact traction are given by
∂tT
∂use =ϵT ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯τβ Rse, and
∂tT
∂ume =−ϵT ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯τβ Rme +ϵT (Rme− Rme(ξmsln )) +ϵT gN ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯n Rme
,β .
(36)
For a tangential slip step, the partial derivatives of the tangential contact traction are
given as
∂tT
∂use =

−µfϵNnT⊗ ¯n−ϵT
µfϵN gN
||ttrial
T || [I−nT⊗nT] ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯τβ

Rse,
∂tT
∂ume =

µfϵNnT⊗ ¯n +ϵT
µfϵN gN
||ttrial
T || [I−nT⊗nT] ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯τβ

Rme
− ϵT
µfϵN gN
||ttrial
T || (I−nT⊗nT) (Rme− Rme(ξm
sln ))
− ϵT
µfϵT gN
||ttrial
T || (I−nT⊗nT) ¯cαβ ¯τα⊗ ¯n Rme
,β .
(37)
References
[1] V. Agrawal and S. S. Gautam. “Varying-order NURBS discretization: an accurate
and efficient method for isogeometric analysis of large deformation contact prob-
lems”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 367 (2020),
p. 113125. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2020.113125.
[2] Wriggers, P. Computational contact mechanics. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2006.
[3] L. De Lorenzis, P. Wriggers, and T. J. R. Hughes. “Isogeometric contact: a re-
view”. In: GAMM Mitteilungen 37 (1) (2014), pp. 85–123. doi: 10.1002/gamm.
201410005.
[4] L. De Lorenzis, P. Wriggers, and C. Weißenfels. “Computational contact mechan-
ics with the finite element method”. In: Encyclopedia of Computational Mechan-
41
ics Second Edition . American Cancer Society, 2017, pp. 1–45. doi: 10 . 1002 /
9781119176817.ecm2033.
[5] J. O. Hallquist, G. L. Goudreau, and D. J. Benson. “Sliding interfaces with contact-
impact in large-scale Lagrangian computations”. In: Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 51 (1) (1985), pp. 107–137. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0045 -
7825(85)90030-1.
[6] P. Wriggers, T. Vu Van, and E. Stein. “Finite element formulation of large defor-
mation impact-contact problems with friction”. In: Computers & Structures 37
(3) (1990), pp. 319–331. doi: 10.1016/0045-7949(90)90324-U.
[7] K. J. Bathe and A. Chaudhary. “A solution method for planar and axisymmetric
contact problems”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineer-
ing 21 (1) (1985), pp. 65–88. doi: 10.1002/nme.1620210107.
[8] P. Alart and A. Curnier. “A mixed formulation for frictional contact problems
prone to Newton like solution methods”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Me-
chanics and Engineering 92 (3) (1991), pp. 353–375. doi: 10 . 1016 / 0045 -
7825(91)90022-X.
[9] J. C. Simo and T. A. Laursen. “An augmented lagrangian treatment of contact
problems involving friction”. In: Computers & Structures 42 (1) (1992), pp. 97–
116. doi: 10.1016/0045-7949(92)90540-G.
[10] G. Pietrzak and A. Curnier. “Large deformation frictional contact mechanics: con-
tinuum formulation and augmented Lagrangian treatment”. In: Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 177 (3) (1999), pp. 351–381. doi:
10.1016/S0045-7825(98)00388-0.
[11] P. Papadopoulos and R. L. Taylor. “A mixed formulation for the finite element
solution of contact problems”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering 94 (3) (1992), pp. 373–389. doi: 10.1016/0045-7825(92)90061-N.
[12] K. A. Fischer and P. Wriggers. “Frictionless 2D contact formulations for finite
deformations based on the mortar method”. In: Computational Mechanics 36 (3)
(2005), pp. 226–244. doi: 10.1007/s00466-005-0660-y .
[13] L. De Lorenzis, I. Temizer, P. Wriggers, and G. Zavarise. “A large deformation fric-
tional contact formulation using NURBS-based isogeometric analysis”. In: Inter-
national Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 87 (13) (2011), pp. 1278–
1300. doi: 10.1002/nme.3159.
42
[14] I. Temizer, P. Wriggers, and T. J. R. Hughes. “Contact treatment in isogeometric
analysis with NURBS”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engi-
neering 200 (9–12) (2011), pp. 1100–1112. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2010.11.020.
[15] R. Dimitri, L. De Lorenzis, M. A. Scott, P. Wriggers, R. L. Taylor, and G. Zavarise.
“Isogeometric large deformation frictionless contact using T-splines”. In:Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 269 (2014), pp. 394–414. doi:
10.1016/j.cma.2013.11.002.
[16] M. A. Puso and T. A. Laursen. “A mortar segment-to-segment contact method for
large deformation solid mechanics”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 193 (6) (2004), pp. 601–629. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2003.10.010.
[17] B. Yang, T. A. Laursen, and X. Meng. “Two dimensional mortar contact methods
for large deformation frictional sliding”. In: International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 62 (9) (2005), pp. 1183–1225. doi: 10.1002/nme.1222.
[18] B. Yang and T. A. Laursen. “A large deformation mortar formulation of self contact
with finite sliding”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
197 (6) (2008), pp. 756–772. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2007.09.004.
[19] M. Tur, F. J. Fuenmayor, and P. Wriggers. “A mortar-based frictional contact for-
mulation for large deformations using Lagrange multipliers”. In: Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 198 (37) (2009), pp. 2860–2873. doi:
10.1016/j.cma.2009.04.007.
[20] A. Popp, M. Gitterle, M. W. Gee, and W. A. Wall. “A dual mortar approach
for 3D finite deformation contact with consistent linearization”. In: International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 83 (11) (2010), pp. 1428–1465.
doi: 10.1002/nme.2866.
[21] A. Popp, A. Seitz, M. W. Gee, and W. A. Wall. “Improved robustness and con-
sistency of 3D contact algorithms based on a dual mortar approach”. In: Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 264 (2013), pp. 67–80. doi:
10.1016/j.cma.2013.05.008.
[22] T. A. Laursen. Computational contact and impact mechanics: fundamentals of
modeling interfacial phenomena in nonlinear finite element analysis . Springer,
Berlin, 2002.
43
[23] P. Wriggers, L. Krstulovic-Opara, and J. Korelc. “Smooth C1-interpolations for
two-dimensional frictional contact problems”. In: International Journal for Nu-
merical Methods in Engineering 51 (12) (2001), pp. 1469–1495. doi: 10.1002/
nme.227.
[24] J. Lengiewicz, J. Korelc, and S. Stupkiewicz. “Automation of finite element for-
mulations for large deformation contact problems”. In: International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering 85 (10) (2011), pp. 1252–1279. doi: 10.1002/
nme.3009.
[25] N. Elabbasi, S. A. Meguid, and A. Czekanski. “On the modelling of smooth contact
surfaces using cubic splines”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering 50 (4) (2001), pp. 953–967. doi: 10.1002/1097-0207(20010210)50:
4<953::AID-NME64>3.0.CO;2-P .
[26] M. Stadler, G. A. Holzapfel, and J. Korelc. “ Cn-continuous modelling of smooth
contact surfaces using NURBS and application to 2D problems”. In: International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 57 (15) (2003), pp. 2177–2203.
doi: 10.1002/nme.776.
[27] M. Puso and T. A. Laursen. “A 3D contact smoothing method using Gregory
patches”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 54 (8)
(2002), pp. 1161–1194. doi: 10.1002/nme.466.
[28] L. Krstulovi´ c-Opara, P. Wriggers, and J. Korelc. “A C1-continuous formulation
for 3D finite deformation frictional contact”. In: Computational Mechanics 29 (1)
(2002), pp. 27–42. doi: 10.1007/s00466-002-0317-z .
[29] M. Stadler and G. A. Holzapfel. “Subdivision schemes for smooth contact sur-
faces of arbitrary mesh topology in 3D”. In: International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering 60 (7) (2004), pp. 1161–1195. doi: 10.1002/nme.1001.
[30] A. Konyukhov and K. Schweizerhof. “Incorporation of contact for high–order finite
elements in covariant form”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering 198 (13) (2009), pp. 1213–1223. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2008.04.023.
[31] A. Konyukhov and K. Schweizerhof. Computational contact mechanics-
geometrically exact theory for arbitrary shaped bodies . Vol. 67. Springer, Heildel-
berg, 2013. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-31531-2 .
44
[32] T. J. R. Hughes, J. A. Cottrell, and Y. Bazilevs. “Isogeometric analysis: CAD, finite
elements, NURBS, exact geometry and mesh refinement”. In: Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 194 (39–41) (2005), pp. 4135–4195. doi:
10.1016/j.cma.2004.10.008.
[33] M. Dittmann, M. Franke, I. Temizer, and C. Hesch. “Isogeometric analysis and
thermomechanical mortar contact problems”. In: Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering 274 (2014), pp. 192–212. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.
02.012.
[34] M. E. Matzen, T. Cichosz, and M. Bischoff. “A point to segment contact formu-
lation for isogeometric, NURBS based finite elements”. In: Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering 255 (2013), pp. 27–39. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.
2012.11.011.
[35] L. De Lorenzis, J. A. Evans, T. J. R. Hughes, and A. Reali. “Isogeometric col-
location: Neumann boundary conditions and contact”. In: Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering 284 (2015), pp. 21–54. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.
2014.06.037.
[36] N. Nguyen-Thanh, W. Li, J. Huang, N. Srikanth, and K. Zhou. “An adaptive iso-
geometric analysis meshfree collocation method for elasticity and frictional contact
problems”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 120
(2) (2019), pp. 209–230. doi: 10.1002/nme.6132.
[37] A. Seitz, P. Farah, J. Kremheller, B. I. Wohlmuth, W. A. Wall, and A. Popp.
“Isogeometric dual mortar methods for computational contact mechanics”. In:
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 301 (2016), pp. 259–
280. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2015.12.018.
[38] S. Das and S. Gautam. “A systematic review of isogeometric contact analysis
and its applications”. In: Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 31
(2024), pp. 4235–4267. doi: 10.1007/s11831-024-10111-9 .
[39] J. A. Cottrell, T. J. R. Hughes, and A. Reali. “Studies of refinement and continuity
in isogeometric structural analysis”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering 196 (41–44) (2007), pp. 4160–4183. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2007.
04.007.
45
[40] I. Temizer, M. M. Abdalla, and Z. Gurdal. “An interior point method for isoge-
ometric contact”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
276 (2014), pp. 589–611. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.03.018.
[41] R. Dimitri and G. Zavarise. “Isogeometric treatment of frictional contact and
mixed mode debonding problems”. In: Computational Mechanics 60 (2) (2017),
pp. 315–332. doi: 10.1007/s00466-017-1410-7 .
[42] I. Temizer and C. Hesch. “Hierarchical NURBS in frictionless contact”. In: Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 299 (2016), pp. 161–186.
doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2015.11.006.
[43] C. Zimmermann and R. A. Sauer. “Adaptive local surface refinement based on
LR NURBS and its application to contact”. In: Computational Mechanics 60 (6)
(2017), pp. 1011–1031. doi: 10.1007/s00466-017-1455-7 .
[44] C. J. Corbett and R. A. Sauer. “NURBS-enriched contact finite elements”. In:
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 275 (2014), pp. 55–75.
doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2014.02.019.
[45] C. J. Corbett and R. A. Sauer. “Three-dimensional isogeometrically enriched finite
elements for frictional contact and mixed-mode debonding”. In:Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 284 (2015), pp. 781–806. doi: 10.1016/
j.cma.2014.10.025.
[46] S. Maleki-Jebeli, M. Mosavi-Mashhadi, and M. Baghani. “A large deformation
hybrid isogeometric-finite element method applied to cohesive interface con-
tact/debonding”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
330 (2018), pp. 395–414. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2017.10.017.
[47] P. Otto, L. De Lorenzis, and J. F. Unger. “Coupling a NURBS contact interface
with a higher order finite element discretization for contact problems using the
mortar method”. In: Computational Mechanics 63 (6) (2019), pp. 1203–1222. doi:
10.1007/s00466-018-1645-y .
[48] A. P. C. Dias, S. P. B. Proenca, and M. L. Bittencourt. “High-order mortar-based
contact element using NURBS for the mapping of contact curved surfaces”. In:
Computational Mechanics 64 (1) (2019), pp. 85–112. doi: 10.1007/s00466-018-
1658-6.
46
[49] R. A. Sauer and L. De Lorenzis. “A computational contact formulation based on
surface potentials”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
253 (2013), pp. 369–395. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2012.09.002.
[50] R. A. Sauer and L. De Lorenzis. “An unbiased computational contact formulation
for 3D friction”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering
101 (4) (2015), pp. 251–280. doi: 10.1002/nme.4794.
[51] L. Piegl and W. Tiller. The NURBS book (monographs in visual communication) .
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2012.
[52] J. A. Cottrell, T. J. R. Hughes, and Y. Bazilevs. Isogeometric analysis: toward
integration of CAD and FEA . Wiley, 2009.
[53] V. Agrawal and S. S. Gautam. “IGA: a simplified introduction and implementation
details for finite element users”. In:Journal of The Institution of Engineers (India):
Series C. 100 (3) (2019), pp. 561–585. doi: 10.1007/s40032-018-0462-6 .
[54] J. Bonet and R. D. Wood. Nonlinear continuum mechanics for finite element anal-
ysis. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[55] L. De Lorenzis, P. Wriggers, and G. Zavarise. “A mortar formulation for 3D large
deformation contact using NURBS-based isogeometric analysis and the augmented
Lagrangian method”. In: Computational Mechanics 49 (1) (2012), pp. 1–20. doi:
10.1007/s00466-011-0623-4 .
[56] R. Dimitri, L. De Lorenzis, P. Wriggers, and G. Zavarise. “NURBS- and T-spline-
based isogeometric cohesive zone modeling of interface debonding”. In: Computa-
tional Mechanics 54 (2) (2014), pp. 369–388. doi: 10.1007/s00466-014-0991-7 .
[57] G. Zavarise and L. De Lorenzis. “A modified node-to-segment algorithm passing
the contact patch test”. In: International Journal for Numerical Methods in En-
gineering 79 (4) (2009), pp. 379–416. doi: 10.1002/nme.2559.
[58] I. Temizer, P. Wriggers, and T. J. R. Hughes. “Three-dimensional mortar-based
frictional contact treatment in isogeometric analysis with NURBS”. In: Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 209–212 (2012), pp. 115–128.
doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2011.10.014.
[59] T. X. Duong, L. De Lorenzis, and R. A. Sauer. “A segmentation-free isogeometric
extended mortar contact method”. In: Computational Mechanics 63 (2) (2019),
pp. 383–407. doi: 10.1007/s00466-018-1599-0 .
47
[60] A. Popp and W. A. Wall. “Dual mortar methods for computational contact
mechanics–overview and recent developments”. In: GAMM-Mitteilungen 37 (1)
(2014), pp. 66–84.
[61] A. Popp. State-of-the-Art computational methods for finite deformation contact
modeling of solids and structures . Ed. by A. Popp and P. Wriggers. Springer In-
ternational Publishing, 2018, pp. 1–86. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-90155-8_1 .
[62] T. J. R. Hughes, A. Reali, and G. Sangalli. “Efficient quadrature for NURBS-
based isogeometric analysis”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering 199 (5–8) (2010), pp. 301–313. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2008.12.004.
[63] F. Auricchio, F. Calabr` o, T. J. R. Hughes, A. Reali, and G. Sangalli. “A simple
algorithm for obtaining nearly optimal quadrature rules for NURBS-based isoge-
ometric analysis”. In: Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering
249–252 (2012), pp. 15–27. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2012.04.014.
[64] F. Fahrendorf, L. De Lorenzis, and H. Gomez. “Reduced integration at supercon-
vergent points in isogeometric analysis”. In:Computer Methods in Applied Mechan-
ics and Engineering 328 (2018), pp. 390–410. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2017.08.028.
[65] N. El-Abbasi and K. J. Bathe. “Stability and patch test performance of contact
discretizations and a new solution algorithm”. In: Computers & Structures 79 (16)
(2001), pp. 1473–1486. doi: 10.1016/S0045-7949(01)00048-7.
[66] A. Popp, B. I. Wohlmuth, M. W. Gee, and W. A. Wall. “Dual quadratic mortar
finite element methods for 3D finite deformation contact”. In: SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing 34 (4) (2012), B421–B446. doi: 10.1137/110848190.
48
