1
LUDO: Low-Latency Understanding of Deformable
Objects using Point Cloud Occupancy Functions
Pit Henrich 1, Franziska Mathis-Ullrich 1, and Paul Maria Scheikl 1,2
Abstract—Accurately determining the shape of objects and the
location of their internal structures within deformable objects is
crucial for medical tasks that require precise targeting, such as
robotic biopsies. We introduce LUDO, a method for accurate low-
latency understanding of deformable objects. LUDO reconstructs
objects in their deformed state, including their internal struc-
tures, from a single-view point cloud observation in under 30 ms
using occupancy networks. LUDO provides uncertainty estimates
for its predictions. Additionally, it provides explainability by high-
lighting key features in its input observations. Both uncertainty
and explainability are important for safety-critical applications
such as surgical interventions. We demonstrate LUDO’s abilities
for autonomous targeting of internal regions of interest (ROIs)
in deformable objects. We evaluate LUDO in real-world robotic
experiments, achieving a success rate of 98.9% for puncturing
various ROIs inside deformable objects. LUDO demonstrates the
potential to interact with deformable objects without the need
for deformable registration methods.
Index Terms—Surgical Robotics: Planning;
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NFERRING the shape of objects and the location of inter-
nal structures in deformable objects is an important task in
medical procedures. Depending on the surgical intervention,
different internal structures have to be either targeted or
avoided. Examples include targeting tumorous tissue during
biopsies and avoiding risk structures such as blood vessels
and nerves.
Preoperative imaging can provide shape information and
the location of these internal structures before an intervention.
However, during interventions, deformations cause significant
deviations from the preoperative state. For example, deforma-
tions occur when the surgeon applies force to soft tissue by
pushing or pulling. Moreover, preoperative imaging modalities
are often not available intraoperatively, necessitating a way to
determine the location and shape of internal structures from
observation modalities that are available during the procedure.
Addressing these challenges, we consider the following
setting: Given the surface mesh of a deformable object in
its non-deformed state, determine the location and shape of
internal structures from a single-view point cloud observation
of the object in its deformed state. In a medical scenario, the
surface mesh can be derived from preoperative imaging such
as segmented Computed Tomography (CT) scans. The point
cloud, captured during an intervention, contains only partial
1 Department Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical Engineering, Friedrich-
Alexander-University Erlangen-N¨urnberg, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.
Corresponding author: franziska.mathis-ullrich@fau.de
2 Laboratory for Computational Sensing and Robotics, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA.
Internal ROIs
Point Cloud
Target ROI
Fig. 1. Robotic setup used for real-world evaluation. An xArm7 robot
(UFactory, China) automatically punctures Regions of Interests (ROIs) inside
a deformable organ phantom using a needle instrument. The inset image
displays the spherical Internal ROIs, with the middle one marked as the Target
ROI for the needle puncture. The Zivid One+ M (Zivid, Norway) is used to
capture a surface Point Cloud of the phantom. This Point Cloud is used by our
proposed method to estimate the location of all ROIs in under 30 milliseconds,
excluding depth image capture time.
information about the visible surface and typically lacks any
features of the internal structures.
For this work, we consider a concrete robotic application:
puncturing a Region of Interest (ROI) within a deformable
object using a needle, similar to a biopsy procedure. The
robotic setup and puncturing task are shown in Figure 1. The
task requires accurately localizing the ROI despite the object’s
deformation. Additionally, it is not enough to only localize
the ROIs as the encompassing object’s surface is needed to
plan suitable trajectories. To minimize deformations caused
by friction during the puncturing, the needle should traverse
as little material as possible before reaching the ROI.
To this end, we propose LUDO, a method that infers
structural information of known deformable objects with low
latency. Given a single-view point cloud of a deforming
object’s surface, LUDO reconstructs a dense point cloud that
captures both the object’s shape and its internal structures.
This is achieved using an Occupancy Network (ON), which
provides an implicit 3D representation conditioned on the
single-view point cloud. Instead of attempting to generalize
across arbitrary shapes, LUDO learns deformation behaviors
for specific prior objects. In a medical context, LUDO is
arXiv:2411.08777v2  [cs.RO]  9 Apr 2025
2
Deformable Phantom
 Dense Output Point Cloud
 Trajectory Planning
 Robotic Puncturing
(
 )
Occupancy
Network
Fig. 2. Automatic puncturing of a Region of Interest (ROI) inside of a deformable object. A point cloud is captured of a Deformable Phantom . The point
cloud is passed to an Occupancy Network as conditioning input. The occupancy network is queried to construct a Dense Output Point Cloud . This Dense
Output Point Cloud is used to perform Trajectory Planning. The planned trajectory is executed on a real-world robotic system to puncture the ROI.
therefore trained using patient-specific data derived from prior
medical scans, such as CT scans. Trained on data from
deformation simulations, the ON can reconstruct the deformed
object, including its internal structures during inference on
real-world observations. The simulation requires only a single
preoperative surface mesh, such as one obtained from a volume
scan. The reconstruction is then used to plan a puncture path
to reach the ROI. The process of inferring and planning a
trajectory based on a single-view point cloud is illustrated in
Figure 2.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
1) Low-Latency Structural Estimation : We provide an
accurate low-latency approach for obtaining structural
information of deformable objects using ONs, con-
ditioned on single-view point cloud observations and
trained on physics-based simulation data.
2) Robotic Puncturing Experiments : We demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed method through real-
world robotic experiments for autonomous puncturing of
targets within three deformable phantoms ( i.e., Organ,
Cylinder, Slab).
3) Uncertainty Estimation and Explainability : We
a) integrate a method for explainability to highlight
which key features in the input were used to
determine the deformation,
b) integrate methods to compute uncertainty for de-
formable object understanding,
c) explore the use of probabilities and different uncer-
tainty estimating methods for selecting an optimal
puncture target position, and
d) conduct preliminary exploration of estimating a
single aggregated uncertainty value to decide
whether a planned puncturing target is safe to
execute.
4) Robot Calibration: We provide practical considerations
for robot calibration to improve the absolute accuracy of
industrial robotic arms in high precision applications.
By addressing the challenge of reconstructing structures of
deformable objects from partial observations, LUDO has the
potential to improve the safety and effectiveness of medical
interventions that rely on accurate localization of internal
anatomy.
II. RELATED WORK
a) Deformable Object Registration: Surface-to-point-
cloud registration is the process of aligning a surface mesh
with a point cloud, commonly through rotations and transla-
tions. An optimal solution is found when the points in the
point cloud are as close as possible to the mesh surface after
registration. For rigid objects, methods such as Iterative Clos-
est Point (ICP) [1] and its derivatives are effective. However,
there are many applications, such as medical tasks, where the
registration target is deformable. A rigid registration approach
will result in increasingly worse results as the amount of
deformation increases. Deformable registration methods, in
addition to rotations and translations, deform the surface mesh
to better fit the point cloud observation. For example, this
can be done by estimating an additional deformation field [2],
[3]. This deformation field applies forces or translations to the
vertices of the surface mesh to deform it.
Jia et al. [4] use neural occupancy functions to improve
registration of human liver models. Instead of directly reg-
istering a preoperative surface mesh to the intraoperatively
observed point cloud, they use the neural occupancy function
conditioned on the point cloud as the registration target. Their
neural occupancy function provides gradients for each point in
3D space, and this gradient field is used to deform the mesh
for registration. Although their approach outperforms rigid
registration methods, it is only viable for small deformations,
as it requires rigid registration for initialization. Initial rigid
registration has inevitable ambiguities under strong deforma-
tions. The dependency on an initial registration is common for
optimization-based registration approaches, and often limits
them to small deformations [5].
In previous work [6], we have shown that using ON-based
reconstruction of deformable objects provides an alternative
to deformable registration methods. Similar to Jia et al. [4],
an ON is conditioned on an input point cloud. However, in
contrast to using the ON as a new registration target, we
generate an object representation that can be used in place of
a registered model. In addition, our approach does not require
initialization through a rigid registration step and works for
large deformations.
In contrast to our previous work [7], we utilize physics-
based simulation to generate realistic deformations for our
3
training data. Combined with a high-quality depth sensor, our
proposed approach is able to accurately reconstruct objects in
the real world. To address transparency and safety in high-risk
applications such as surgery, we extend the method to provide
initial quantitative measures of uncertainty and explainability.
We demonstrate our method’s effectiveness through real-world
robotic experiments that require accurate reconstruction of
internal structures in deformable objects.
b) Deformable Object Manipulation: Interaction with
deformable objects is investigated through classical and data-
driven model-based methods. These approaches manipulate
deformable objects and indirectly achieve the desired shapes
of the internal structures for biopsies [8], cryoablation [9],
and suturing [10]. However, these approaches assume that the
position and shape of the internal structures can be determined
intraoperatively from sensor observations, for example through
an ultrasound probe. This limits their applicability and further
requires complex data processing to locate, segment, and
reconstruct the internal structures from the ultrasound images.
Florence et al. [11] learn dense visual descriptors capturing
correspondences across different object instances and views.
This enables robots to manipulate deformable objects by
understanding their visual geometry without explicitly mod-
eling deformations. However, they do not model the internal
structures of deformable objects.
Other works investigate deformable object manipulation
with the goal of reaching desired deformation states [12]–[14].
However, they are also unable to reason about the deformation
state of internal structures, which is essential for medical tasks
such as biopsies.
III. M ETHOD OVERVIEW
This work consists of two primary components: LUDO
itself and the robotic experimental method.
Section IV details our proposed method, LUDO, for low-
latency understanding of deformable objects using point cloud
occupancy functions. LUDO estimates both the external and
internal structures of deformable objects from single-view
point cloud observations.
Section V details our real-world robotic experiments. We
describe the robotic system that uses the LUDO-generated re-
constructions for targeting and puncturing tasks in deformable
objects. This includes an approach to improve the abso-
lute accuracy of industrial robotic systems through Denavit-
Hartenberg (DH) parameter optimization.
IV. LUDO
LUDO provides 3D structural information of deformable
objects in the form of a dense output point cloud, see Figure 2.
LUDO uses an ON trained on realistic deformation data
generated through finite element method (FEM) simulations.
In this section, we first describe how deformable objects
can be reconstructed by a trained ON, conditioned on an
observation point cloud. We detail how to produce training
data for such ON, using a sampling strategy optimized for
occupancy learning and a physics based deformation simu-
lation. We describe techniques to provide local uncertainty
Occupancy Function
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
0
SDF
−5.2
−2.9
−1.4
1.5
3.1
−6.0
−3.9
−2.4
−0.1
1.6
−6.5
−4.3
−3.0
−0.5
1.1
−6.0
−4.2
−2.4
−0.4
1.4
−4.9
−3.1
−0.9
0.3
2.6
Decision Boundary
Query Point
Inside
Outside
Fig. 3. Visualization of an Occupancy Function and a Signed Distance
Function (SDF) . The Occupancy Function only encodes inside and outside
of an object using binary values of 1 and 0 respectively. The SDF provides
the distance to the Decision Boundary and uses the sign (+ or -) to indicate
if the point is inside or outside the object.
values for every part of the inferred structures. Additionally,
by aggregating the local uncertainty values we can provide
a single aggregated uncertainty value. Finally, we provide a
masking based explainability approach to identify features in
the input point cloud that are decisive during inference.
A. Object Reconstruction with Occupancy Networks
An occupancy function
f :q→s, q ∈ R3,s∈ N0 (1)
represents a 3D object, consisting of multiple segments, by
mapping Cartesian query points q to scalar values s. Each
value ofs represents a different segment of the object. Clusters
of points with the same value s form the segments. For
example, an organ model with a single internal tumor may be
represented using s∈{ 0, 1, 2}, where points with the values
1 or 2 are inside the organ or tumor, respectively. The value
of 0 is reserved for all points outside of the object. A visual
example of an occupancy function is shown in Figure 3.
The occupancy function f can also be conditioned on an
observationo so that
f :q,o→s, q ∈ R3,o∈ Rm,s∈ N0 (2)
can represent different objects, different deformation states, or
different object poses. Without the observation, the occupancy
function can only represent a single object in a single state.
An ON Mθ(·) can be used to approximate f, where θ
represents learnable parameters. The learnable parameters are
optimized by minimizing the term:
min
θ
X
i
X
j
Lc 
f(qj,oi),Mθ(qj,oi)

, (3)
4
(a) (b)
Artifact
Artifact
Fig. 4. Examples of a single deformable slab that was reconstructed by
two different occupancy networks in the early stages of training. The network
producing (a) only uses a cross-entropy loss during training and shows two
floating artifacts. The cross-entropy loss only distinguishes between inside
and outside the object and does not indicate how severe a misclassification is.
The network producing (b) uses an additional distance loss that ensures that
misclassifications far from the main object are strongly discouraged.
where i and j iterate over the observations and query points,
respectively. We use a cross entropy loss Lc:
Lc =
X
s
−1(f(q,o ) =s) log
 
Mθ(s|q,o )

, (4)
where 1(·) is 1 if the query pointq belongs to segments and 0
otherwise, andMθ(s|q,o ) is the probability that q belongs to
the segments given the observationo. We estimateMθ(s|q,o )
by applying the softmax function to the model output logits.
The ground truth values from f do not provide a signal
that indicates how close the estimate of Mθ is to the correct
label. Points very far from the object of interest should provide
a strong training signal if they are incorrectly classified as
being inside of the object. This signal is important to instill
the concept of the compactness (an object being confined to a
specific area) of reconstructions in Mθ. It prevents the object
from extending infinitely or from having clusters appearing far
away from the main object.
The signal can be provided by an additional loss based on
the query point distance to the nearest surface [6]. A qualitative
example for the effect of using an additional distance loss is
shown in Figure 4. A Signed Distance Function (SDF)
d :q,o→r±, q ∈ R3,o∈ Rm,r±∈ R (5)
provides the distance r± of a query point q to the nearest
object surface.
The sign of the distance indicates if the point is inside or
outside of the object, see Figure 3.
Mθ(·) can be trained to approximate (f×d) : R3× Rm→
N0×R to model both occupancy and signed distance functions.
For training, we use an L1 loss for the signed distance
L± =|d(q,o )−Mθ(q,o )|. (6)
For readability, we assume thatLc uses the class andL± uses
the signed distance output of Mθ.
We combineLc andL± into the final loss function
Lλ =Lc +λL±, (7)
whereλ is a weighting factor to balance the loss components.
The final optimization problem is
min
θ
X
i
X
j
Lλ(qj,oi). (8)
Using a point cloud P = {p0,p 1,···} ⊂ R3 as the
conditioning observation requires additional considerations.
The naive approach of concatenating all points into an obser-
vation vector o = (p0,p 1,··· ) results in an order dependent
representation, where (p0,p 1,··· )̸= (p1,p 0,··· ).
Point cloud encoders address the issue by distilling a point
cloud into a latent vector in an order-invariant manner, often
utilizing commutative operations. We therefore use a point
cloud encoder E θ2 to generate a latent representation of the
point cloud observation P , and use this latent representation
as conditioning o for the point cloud ON:
Mθ(q,o ) =ME
θ(q,P ) = MLPθ1(q, Eθ2(P )| {z }
o
), (9)
where E θ2 encodes the point cloud P and the Multilayer
Perceptron (MLP θ1) estimates the occupancy of the query
pointq with respect to the encoding. The learnable parameters
are θ = (θ1,θ 2).
In previous work [6], we have shown the suitability of
PointNet++ [15] as the point cloud encoder E θ2 for 3D
reconstruction tasks using conditioned ONs. A fully connected
MLP has been shown to be suitable for conditionally mapping
query points to segment labels and distances [16], [17].
The density of the input point cloud depends significantly
on the sensor’s distance during data acquisition. Closer depth
sensors capture more surface points, while farther ones capture
fewer. Unlike synthetic data, real-world point clouds often
contain holes where depth data could not be estimated. To
ensure that the point cloud encoder is robust to varying
point cloud densities and incomplete data, we randomly drop
points from the input point cloud P during training. For our
application, we found that dropping 50% of input points results
in no degradation of LUDO’s performance.
We solely use the positional data for P . Incorporating color
in the point cloud would require accurate surface textures
during training. Prior models, such as ones derived from
CT scans, only provide structural information. Additionally,
textures complicate the sim-to-real transfer, as the training
data would have to be rendered realistically or extensive visual
augmentation would have to be used.
Neural networks tend to learn smoothed 3D representations,
missing high frequency details [18], [19]. To increase the
sensitivity of ME
θ to small positional changes in the query
points, we use our previously introduced negative-exponent
sinusoidal encoding [6]
β(q) =
 
sin(2−4πq), cos(2−4πq),...,
sin(25πq), cos(25πq)

(10)
to encode all query points q∈Q. Both sin and cos are applied
element-wise. Note the addition of the negative exponents
which is not used in work such as NeRF [19].
5
View
Frustum
Depth Sensor
Object
Point Cloud
Observation
P
Normalized
Space
(−1, 1) (1, 1)
(−1,−1) (1,−1)
Fig. 5. 2D example of a scene containing a Depth Sensor and an Object.
The depth sensor produces a Point Cloud Observation P within its View
Frustum. This observationP is normalized to [−1, 1]2. AsP is only a partial
observation, the normalized range will not contain the full Object. To reason
about regions outside the normalization space, a neural occupancy function
must use a positional encoding that can uniquely represent points outside the
normalization range.
Because sinusoidal functions are periodic, all queries are
performed within a normalized space to ensure that each query
point can be uniquely encoded. The observation point cloud P
reflects the real-world scale of the captured objects. Since the
labeling of Q is done in the coordinates of the point cloud P ,
we must normalize P . We calculate a uniform scaling factor
across all dimensions and offset P so that it lies within the
range [−1, 1]3. Using negative exponents stretches the periods
of the sinusoidal functions in our encoding, ensuring that
points outside [−1, 1]3 can still be uniquely represented and
queried. This is important because the normalization is based
on partial observations P of the object, making it necessary
to handle queries outside this space to obtain a reconstruction
of the full object, see Figure 5.
The architecture of LUDO is illustrated in Figure 6. The
used hyperparameters are listed in Table I.
Ground Truth Occupancy Point Cloud: ONs are trained
through supervised learning. Each training sample is a tuple
(Qgt,P ), whereQgt⊂ R3×N0×R is a segment labelled point
cloud with distances to the nearest surface, and P is a point
cloud observation.Qgt, which we will refer to as an occupancy
point cloud, contains ground truth values that are used in
place of the function (f×d). The performance of the trained
ON depends on how the points in Qgt are distributed [6].
Ideally, points in Qgt should be close to the surfaces between
segments. Such points help the network to accurately define
the boundaries between segments, leading to more precise part
segmentation and better surface details.
We use the Improved Sort Sample (ISS) [20] to generate
training data. Unlike the original SortSample [6], ISS can
produce data for nested objects such as ROIs inside of a
larger object. The fundamental idea of ISS is illustrated in
Figure 7. Spatial points are uniformly sampled within an
extended bounding box of each object segment. For each
segment, points are sampled until at least t query points are
found that are inside the segment and t points are found that
are outside the segment. These two sets of points are then
sorted based on the distance to the nearest surface. Only the
closest k points to surfaces in both sets are kept. All such
sets from each segment are appended to create a ground truth
P Q∋q = (x,y,z )
Normalization
Point Drop
PointNet++
(l1,··· ,l 1024)×β(q)∈ R1024×b
Input
1024 + b
512
512
512
1024 + b + 512
512
512
512
C + 1
MLP
Occupancy + Signed Distance
P← Normalize(P )
P← ˆP, ˆP⊂P
append
l←EPointNet++(P )
Input
Occupancy
Network
Fig. 6. The point cloud observation P , obtained from a depth sensor, is
normalized to fit inside [−1, 1]3 (preserving aspect-ratios). Up to 50% of
points from P are dropped randomly by Point Drop and the resulting point
cloud is passed to the PointNet++ encoder to distill a latent representation
(l1,··· ,l 1024). The query point, taken from Q, is encoded by β and
then appended to the latent. The concatenated vector is passed to the
MLP. Additionally, as skip connection from the input to the fifth layer is
used. Between each layer, ReLU is used as an activation function. Batch
normalization is used for the MLP. The output is the label for the original
query point and the signed distance.
occupancy point cloud Qgt. The used hyperparameters are
listed in Table I.
B. Simulation based Data Generation:
Training samples (Qgt,P ) are created from simulated de-
formed states of a prior model. Labelled query points Qgt are
sampled through ISS and P is generated with a virtual depth
camera. The position of the virtual camera is randomized to
allow reconstructions independent of a calibrated camera pose.
We use the FEM physics engine Simulation Open Frame-
work Architecture (SOFA) [21] for deformation simulation.
SOFA is an open-source framework for mechanical simula-
tions, designed with a strong emphasis on biomechanics and
robotics to allow for modeling of deformations. In addition
6
Outside Inside Outside Inside
k=9 k=9
Fig. 7. Schematic of the Improved SortSample algorithm. a) Sample randomly
until at leastt points inside andm points outside. b) Sort samples by distance
to surface. c) Take nearest k samples on each side of the surface.
to our prior experience with SOFA, it is also used for
simulating soft-robotic actuators, which also require precise
internal deformation modeling [22]–[24]. The physical sim-
to-real gap of modern FEM simulators such as SOFA is
narrow enough to enable sim-to-real transfer of deformable
object manipulation tasks [25]. Undeformed prior 3D surface
meshes of the objects of interest are used to create a sparse,
hexahedral FEM topology of the object, including the internal
structures. The objects are then deformed by applying forces
on interaction regions on the object surface. The deformed
states of the objects are then used to create training samples
(Qgt,P ).
OrganCylinderSlab
Fig. 8. Examples for simulated deformations of Organ, Cylinder, and Slab.
The deformations are created by applying forces on random (Organ) or pre-
defined regions (Cylinder - Tip, Slab - Corners). The Regions of Interest
(ROIs) are represented as deformable spheres inside each object.
Example deformations for our three evaluation objects Or-
gan, Cylinder, and Slab are shown in Figure 8. The Slab and
Cylinder allow us to assess LUDO in low-feature scenarios,
while the Organ presents a more complex 3D shape. Data
generation and training is visualized in Figure 9, and Figure 10
illustrates an example training progress for the Organ object.
Object
Deformed Object
Query Points
Q
Point Cloud
P
Occup. Point
Cloud Qgt
Occupancy
Network
Estimated
Labels
Lθ,λ
FEM Simulation
Impr. SortSample
Depth Sensor
Update
Fig. 9. The data and training pipeline. Forces are applied to an Object to create
a Deformed Object. The improved SortSample is used to obtain a ground-truth
Occupancy Point Cloud Qgt. Simultaneously, a point cloud observation P
from the camera perspective is created. A query point cloud Q is obtained by
removing class information from Qgt. The Occupancy Network , conditioned
on P , estimates the labels for all points in Q. The loss is computed with
respect to Qgt and used to update the Occupancy Network .
TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS FOR DATA GENERATION AND TRAINING .
Hyper Parameter Value
Training samples (Qgt,P ) 30 000
Batch size 40
Epochs 700
SortSample t =k = 128
Optimizer Adam
Learning rate 0.0005
Loss function weighting (Lλ) λ = 100
The used hyperparameters are listed in Table I.
Inference: The ON, conditioned on a point cloud observation,
encodes the shape and positions of all objects implicitly.
We query the ON using query points sampled randomly
from [−1.5, 1.5]3, to obtain the relevant spatial information
for downstream tasks. The bounding box extends outside
the normalization range [−1, 1]3 to ensure the full object is
reconstructed, see Section IV-A. To focus the samples on
relevant parts of this space, we apply a two-stage sampling
approach. First, we query the volume using 10 000 query
points to obtain a rough bounding box of the objects. This
bounding box is enlarged by 20% and then sampled more
densely to obtain the final dense output point cloud. Enlarging
the bounding box minimizes the possibility of surfaces being
7
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
almost identical
Output
Epoch
mIoU
Fig. 10. Training progress for the Organ scene. A dense reconstruction is
performed by querying the occupancy network on an equidistant grid. We
show the reconstruction quality, computed on a separate test dataset, as the
mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) over 700 epochs. After approximately
300 epochs, the network produces outputs that are almost identical to the
final outputs. The input point cloud P is included as pink points in the dense
reconstruction. One epoch takes approximately one minute to complete on a
single Nvidia RTX 4090 (Nvidia, United States).
cut-off. We experimentally evaluate the number of points
required to accurately localize each ROI. A resulting dense 3D
point cloud is shown in Figure 2. This explicit dense output
point cloud can then be used for downstream tasks, such as
targeting specific ROIs in Section VII.
C. Local Per-Point Relative Uncertainty Estimation:
For safety-critical applications such as surgical interven-
tions, we are interested in how certain the ON is about its
predictions. For the application of puncturing a ROI inside
a deformable object, we speculate that targeting the Cartesian
position where the ON is most certain improves the robustness
of the puncturing task. We therefore extend ONs to enable the
estimation of per-point relative uncertainty.
We consider two methods to compute uncertainty: a naive
activation entropy based approach and Monte Carlo Dropout
(MCD) [26].
a) Activation Entropy: The activation entropy of the
network’s logits, after applying a softmax, can correlate to the
model’s confidence about its prediction [27]. Lower entropy
in the output layer typically corresponds to higher confidence
in predictions, as the model is more certain about the specific
classes. Conversely, higher activation entropy suggests higher
uncertainty, indicating that the model does not favor any
particular class. To this end, we compute the categorical
probability distribution
pq = (Mθ(0|q,o ),··· ,Mθ(C|q,o )), (11)
from the softmax outputs for each query point q given some
observation o across C + 1 classes. C is the number of
segments and 0 is reserved for points outside of all segments.
We then compute the predictive entropy
H(pq) =−
X
j
p(j)
q log(p(j)
q +ϵ), (12)
where p(j)
q is the probability of point q being of class j andϵ
is a small value added for numerical stability.
b) Monte-Carlo Dropout: MCD is the second approach
that we investigate to quantify the uncertainty of neural
network predictions [26]. Dropout is normally used during
training to improve the generalization performance of the
network, and is usually disabled during inference. With MCD,
dropout is also enabled during inference. This results in a
virtual ensemble of models that can be used for inference.
Instead of a single deterministic prediction, we sample the
modelm = 30 times with the same input but different random
seeds for dropout. We then average the predictions pq,i across
all random seeds i to obtain the mean predicted probability
for each point as
ˆpq = 1
m
mX
i=1
pq,i. (13)
Finally, we compute the predictive entropy
H( ˆpq) =−
X
j
ˆp(j)
q log(ˆp(j)
q +ϵ) (14)
using the averaged probabilities ˆpq, where ˆp(j)
q is the average
probability of class j, and ϵ is a small value for numerical
stability.
D. Aggregated Uncertainty Estimation:
Per-point relative uncertainty estimation provides informa-
tion about what parts of a reconstruction the ON is most
confident about. However, the per-point uncertainties do not
provide global information regarding how certain the overall
reconstruction is. For safety critical applications, having a
single value indicating the confidence or quality of the recon-
struction can be important, for example, to prevent a robotic
system from performing a task when confidence is lacking
or to provide feedback to human operators. We investigate
whether the activation entropy and MCD entropy can also
be used to obtain such a single aggregated uncertainty value.
For this, we aggregate the local per-point uncertainties from
a dense output point cloud to obtain a single aggregated
uncertainty value. For aggregation, we take the mean of the
local per-point uncertainties
Haggregated = 1
|Q|
X
q∈Q
H(pq), (15)
where Haggregated is the aggregated uncertainty estimate, Q is
the query point cloud, and H(pq) is the predictive entropy
computed for the query point q. This provides an estimate of
the model’s average uncertainty.
8
E. Explainability
Uncertainty estimation can provide information about how
confident the system is about its predictions. Explainability
clarifies how or why a model makes a specific prediction [28]–
[30]. In medical applications, autonomous systems are super-
vised by human experts to ensure the safety of the procedure.
In these settings, explainability may increase transparency,
build trust, and simplify the identification and correction of
biases and errors. We address explainability of our method
with a point cloud masking based approach to identify which
features in the input point cloud P are most relevant to the
prediction, and present the results qualitatively.
Masking-based Explainability: Given an input point cloudP
we want to identify the parts of the point cloud that are most
important for the ON predictions. For this task we consider
the explainability for reconstructing the whole object with all
internal structures. To this end, we propose a point cloud
masking-based approach. Intuitively, the idea is to remove
circular patches of the input point cloud and quantify how
much the subsequent reconstruction is affected. The full point
cloudP , without any removed patches, serves as the baseline
as it contains the maximum amount of information.
We start by sampling 40 000 random points in the extended
bounding box U 3(−1.5, 1.5) to obtain a query point cloud
Q ={q1,··· ,q 40000}⊂ R3. We then compute the baseline
prediction
Smax =ME
θ(Q,P ). (16)
Additionally, we define the neighborhood function to use for
circular patch selection
NP (p,r ) ={x∈P|∥p−x∥2 <r}, (17)
where r is the radius of the circular patch and p is the point
whose neighboring points are to be determined. The patches
selected by this function will be removed from P to evaluate
how important the contained points are for the reconstruction.
We create the masked point clouds Pi by removing patches
for each point in the original point cloud P :
Pi =P\NP (pi,r ). (18)
Specifically, for every point in P , we generate a masked point
cloud by removing the patch around that point. This process
results in as many masked point clouds as there are points
in P , with each masked point cloud missing a unique patch
associated with the neighborhood of a different point.
We then infer dense output point clouds Si for each masked
point cloud Pi:
Si =ME
θ(Q,Pi). (19)
Finally, we can compute the similarity betweenSi andSmax. If
Si andSmax are labelled identically, the missing patch of points
is not relevant for reconstruction. As a similarity measure h,
we compute the fraction of points with matching labels. We
can visualize the importance of a point pi through a heat-
map colorization, where the scalar value of a point pi is the
corresponding similarity value h(Smax,Si). The explainability
values are affected by the radiusr. In preliminary experiments,
we found that setting the radius r to 20% of the longest side
of the bounding box around the point cloud P yielded good
results.
V. A UTONOMOUS PUNCTURING
This section outlines the methods to perform autonomous
puncturing tasks utilizing the structural information provided
by LUDO. The goal is to accurately target and puncture
ROIs within deformable objects based on a single point cloud
observation.
For this, we use a point cloud observation, obtained using
our robotic setup, to infer a dense output point cloud. The
dense output point cloud is transformed into the robot’s
coordinate system, predicting target positions for puncturing,
planning the puncture path, and calibrating the robot to im-
prove its absolute positioning accuracy.
A. Robotic Setup
Our robotic setup consists of a rigid table with a 50×50 mm
grid of mounting points to which we attach deformable ob-
jects. Additionally, a Zivid One+ M (Zivid, Norway) depth
camera and a UFactory xArm 7 (UFactory, China) industrial
robot are attached to the table. A needle is attached to the
industrial robotic arm, a close up is shown in Figure 2.
The Zivid One+ M is mounted approximately 1 m from the
deformable objects. The setup is shown in Figure 1.
B. Physical Phantoms
We create three different silicone phantoms: Organ, Cylin-
der, and Slab. Each phantom is deformable and contains three
spherical ROIs with a diameter of 17 mm that will be the
targets for robotic puncturing. Further, the phantoms are re-
usable and accurately represent the 3D objects used for train-
ing. To create our phantoms, we use a silicone molding process
with electrically conducting ROIs, see Figure 11. Whether
a puncture is successful can be determined by checking for
electrical continuity between the needle and a wire connected
to the targeted ROI. We first design and 3D print molds with
pins to define the negative space for the spherical ROIs. We
then mix the silicone (ECOFLEX 0020, Smooth-On, United
States) with silicone color pigment (Silc Pig, Smooth-On,
United States) with a weight ratio of 100 : 3 . The mixture
is degassed using a vacuum chamber and poured into the 3D
printed mold. The pins that form the negative space for the
ROIs are inserted. After the silicone is fully cured, the pins
are removed, leaving negative space for three ROIs. Each
spherical ROI is formed with extra fine steel wool (grade
0000) using another 3D printed mold. A thin silicone wire is
stripped and entangled with the steel wool. The ROIs are then
positioned inside the silicone phantom. The wires are threaded
through the phantom, such that they exit at the backside of the
phantom. The negative spaces with the steel wool ROIs are
then filled with silicone. The phantom is then placed into the
vacuum chamber to ensure the silicone fully infuses each ROI.
After topping up the negative spaces as needed and fully curing
the silicone, the excess is removed. Each phantom is then
glued onto a rigid 3D base using a primer and cyanoacrylate
9
1. 3D Printed Mold
 2. Pour and Vacuum
 3. Shaped ROIs
 4. ROIs in Organ
 5. Wires Buried
6. Holes Filled
 7. Fully Cured
 8. Excess Cut-off
 9. Final Phantom
 10. Mounted
Fig. 11. Visualized process of creating a physical phantom. Each silicone phantom is molded with negative spaces for the Regions of Interests (ROIs). After
placing the ROIs in the negative spaces and re-routing their wires through the phantom, the holes are filled with additional silicone. All excess material is
removed and the phantom is mounted on to the setup.
adhesives. The rigid base allows the phantom to be attached
to the table of the experimental setup. Examples how the real-
world phantoms can be deformed are shown in Figure 12.
C. Target Position Prediction
To obtain the structural information of the deformable
phantom, we first acquire a point cloud of its surface using
our depth camera. The phantom surface is segmented from the
background by color. From the input surface point cloud, the
ON then infers a dense output point cloud that includes both
the external shape and internal structures of the deformable
phantom. We then transform the dense output point cloud into
the robot coordinate system for trajectory planning. The goal
position for puncturing is defined as the center of each ROI.
The straightforward way of determining the ROI centers is
calculating the geometric center of points in the point cloud
that are labeled as belonging to the ROI. As an alternative, we
further investigate the use of local uncertainties and softmax-
probabilities to weigh the influence of each point when com-
puting the center.
Uncertainty Weighted Centroid (UWC) is the centroid of a
set of points, using the prediction uncertainty of each point
as a weight. Given a set of points {(xi,yi,zi,ui)}i where
(xi,yi,zi) are the coordinates of the i-th point and ui is the
uncertainty of the predicted label, the UWC is a weighted
arithmetic mean of the coordinates. To compute the UWC, we
1) normalize the uncertainties
u′
i = uiP
juj
,
2) convert uncertainties to certainties
ci = 1−u′
i,
3) normalize certainties
c′
i = ciP
jcj
, and
4) compute the UWC
UWC =
 X
i
c′
ixi,
X
i
c′
iyi,
X
i
c′
izi
!
.
Finally, we consider the Softmax Probability Weighted
Centroid (SPWC). The SPWC is the centroid of a set of points,
using the softmax probabilities of each point as a weight.
For this we consider the per-point softmax probability of the
predicted label as a weight, see Equation (11). Similar to the
UWC, these weights are normalized over all points with the
same label.
D. Puncture Path Planning
For puncturing a ROI, we use the target position as de-
scribed in Section V-C. We then locate the point in the
dense output point cloud that is closest on the surface of the
deformed phantom. The vector between the target point and
the corresponding closest point on the surface provides the
puncture trajectory. For robotic execution, we first approach
the surface point at a distance, to align the robotic needle with
the puncture trajectory, and then translate the needle along the
trajectory to reach the target point.
E. Robot Calibration
As the goal of our robotic setup is to puncture ROIs with
a diameter of 17 mm, the accuracy of the robotic system is
critical. We use an industrial robotic arm with serial kinematics
that has a repeatability of ±0.1 mm (i.e., the ability to return
to the same position again and again). However the accuracy
10
Organ
 Cylinder
 Slab
Fig. 12. Example deformations of real-world objects. The images are taken by the depth camera, alongside the actual point clouds used as inference input.
Helping hands are used to deform the objects.
(i.e., the ability to move to a desired absolute position in space)
varies non-linearly in the workspace with average deviations
of 5.466 mm and a maximum of 8.752 mm. Therefore, these
deviations are comparable to the radius of the ROIs ( 8.5 mm).
To ensure that ROIs can be hit reliably, the accuracy of the
robotic arm needs to be improved. For this, we calibrate
its DH parameters [31] by learning offsets that minimize
the difference between the end-effector positions that were
determined by the robot’s internal forward kinematics and
reference positions measured by an optical tracking system,
see Figure 13.
We describe the kinematic chain of the7 Degree of Freedom
(DoF) serial robotic arm with one tuple of DH parameters
ωi := (θi,di,αi,ai) per joint i. Each tuple of DH parameters
ωi = ˆωi + ∆ωi is the sum of manufacturer provided DH
parameters ˆωi and a calibration offset ∆ωi that we estimate
from data. We further use a position vector pbase∈ R3 and
XYZ Euler angles ϕbase ∈ R3 to describe the pose of the
robot’s base in relation to a fixed world-reference coordinate
system. We optimize pbase, ϕbase, and ∆ωi to minimize the
error between the robot’s position determined by the manu-
facturer’s DH parameters ωi and its true pose in 3D space.
To obtain the true position and rotation of the end-effector,
we use an infrared marker based tracking system (OptiTrack
PrimeX 13W, NaturalPoint, United States) with a 3D printed
marker attachment for the robot. In our setup, the track-
ing system achieves an accuracy of approximately 0.4 mm.
Our calibration dataset consists of triplets (ptracked,q tracked,ξ ),
where ptracked ∈ R3 and qtracked ∈ R4 represent the end-
effector position and orientation, respectively, as measured by
the optical tracker, while ξ ∈ R7 contains the joint values
recorded from the robot’s encoders. The robot moves along
Marker
Marker
Tracking Camera
Fig. 13. Calibration setup used to improve the accuracy of the robotic system.
The xArm7 robot (UFactory, China) with an infrared Marker attachment
moves around while being tracked by three OptiTrack PrimeX 13W Tracking
Cameras (NaturalPoint, United States). The Tracking Cameras are arranged
in a triangular configuration around the robotic setup at a distance of
approximately 2 m. Only one of the Tracking Cameras is visible in the image.
trajectories between 500 randomly generated end-points. The
triplets are recorded at static end-points of trajectories after a
short pause to minimize settling vibrations.
The complete forward kinematics transformation that de-
scribes the pose of the end-effector in relation to the fixed
world-reference coordinate system is
TEE =Tbase
7Y
i=1
Ti, (20)
where Ti∈ R4×4 is the homogeneous transformation matrix
11
of the i-th joint for DH parameters ωi, constructed as
Ti =


cθi −sθi 0 ai
sθi·cαi cθi·cαi −sαi −di·sαi
sθi·sαi cθi·sαi cαi di·cαi
0 0 0 1

, (21)
with shorthands s and c for sin(·) and cos(·), respectively.
Tbase∈ R4×4 is the homogeneous transformation matrix for
pbase andϕbase. For optimization, we compute the end-effector
position using the forward kinematics with θ = ξ + ∆θ,
where ξ are the joint values from our dataset. The resulting
homogeneous matrix TEE encodes the end-effector position
pforward and end-effector orientation quaternion qforward. The
parameterspbase,ϕbase, and ∆ωi are optimized by minimizing
a combined loss function
L =Lpos +λLrot, (22)
where λ is a weighting for the rotation loss. We set λ = 100
to scale both loss components to the same order of magnitude.
The position loss
Lpos = 1
S
SX
j=1



p(j)
tracked−p(j)
forward



2
(23)
is the mean 2-norm between measured end-effector positions
ptracked from the optical tracking system and the predicted
position pforward overS = 500 samples in the dataset.
The rotation loss
Lrot = 1
S
SX
j=1
min
n


q(j)
tracked±q(j)
forward



2
o
(24)
is the mean over the quaternion difference defined by
Huynh [32]. Quaternions can represent the same rotation with
either a positive or negative sign. The loss function takes
the minimum 2-norm difference between both possibilities to
account for this sign ambiguity in quaternion representation.
The optimization is performed with stochastic mini-batch
gradient descent, using PyTorch’s implementation of the Adam
optimizer [33].
VI. E XPERIMENTS
To evaluate the performance of LUDO in the context of
low-latency targeting of internal structures within deformable
objects, we conduct a series of experiments designed to
assess various aspects of the system. This includes inference
speed, prediction accuracy, uncertainty estimation, explainabil-
ity, robot calibration, and real-world autonomous puncturing.
The centroid error metric measures the error between the
predicted and ground truth centroid of a ROI. All time
measurements were performed using a single Nvidia RTX
4090 (Nvidia, United States). LUDO was trained according
to Section IV using the prior 3D surface models, containing
the ROIs, of each phantom. The hyperparameters were chosen
according to Table I unless stated otherwise.
A. Inference Time
We measure LUDO’s inference speed by varying the num-
ber of query points and observing the trade-off between
response time and accuracy in localizing internal structures.
The goal is to optimize speed without sacrificing precision.
B. Uncertainty Estimation
We explore activation-based and MCD-based uncertainty
estimation. These experiments are designed to determine
whether per-point uncertainty can be used to influence the
centroid estimation of the ROIs to improve targeting accuracy.
For this, we compare the centroid error of the UWC method
with a regular geometric centroid and the SPWC. Additionally,
we want to evaluate whether it is possible to obtain a single
aggregated uncertainty value. This single value can be used to
determine if it is safe to perform a task given the input data.
These experiments are performed in simulation, using N = 50
different deformations for each object.
C. Explainability
We test the system’s explainability to highlight important
regions in the input point cloud. This helps identify which
features are most relevant for understanding the objects’
deformations and ensures that the system’s decisions are
interpretable.
D. Robot Calibration
We evaluate the end-effector positioning error, defined as
the distance between the end-effector position predicted by
the robot’s forward kinematics and the actual position mea-
sured by the optical tracker. In addition to the calibration as
described in Section V-E, we perform ablative experiments
to show the impact of the individual design decisions. The
ablations are:
• (∆θ-Only Calibration) Learning only ∆θ, to determine
whether the error stems from incorrectly calibrated zero
positions of the rotational joints in the kinematic chain.
• (Fixed Tbase) Using a manually measured fixed transfor-
mation between robot base and world-reference Tbase.
• (Dynamic Data) Collecting data triplets
(ptracked,q tracked,ξ ) during the movement between
end-points (i.e., not just static end points).
• (Single Joint Movement) Instead of moving along tra-
jectories between end-points in Cartesian space, move the
robot in joint space, a single joint at a time.
E. Comparison to Baseline
We compare LUDO to V olume2SurfaceCNN (V2S) [3].
This comparison requires multiple considerations due to the
limitations of current deformable registration approaches. Cur-
rent deformable registration methods commonly require an
initial rigid alignment of the observation to the prior model [5].
V2S is able to perform deformable registration without an
initial rigid alignment if the object that is to be registered
is fully observable (not just a single view). In cases where
12
0 50k 100k150k
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
ROI Center Error [cm]
ROI Center Error Inference Time
0 50k 100k150k
Query Points
0 50k 100k150k
0
0.1
Inference Time [s]
a) Organ b) Cylinder c) Slab
Fig. 14. Relationship between the number of query points, the inference time
(excludes depth image capture time) and the error of the estimated centroid to
the ground truth centroid. Measurements taken on a single Nvidia RTX 4090
(Nvidia, United States).
only a partial observation of the surface is present, the results
depend highly on the initial rigid alignment. Rigid initial
alignment approaches, for example using ICP, will inevitably
fail once deformations become too strong. Therefore, given
single-view or partial observations, the V2S authors propose
performing the initial alignment manually. For this evaluation,
we ensure the evaluation dataset is already rigidly aligned
for V2S. Therefore, the observations are optimally aligned
in the world-space of the prior model. Finally, we evaluate
V2S using both single-view and full surface observation of
the deformed object. Having a full surface observation of the
deformable objects is impractical in most applications. We
will only provide LUDO with single-view observations and
no initial alignment. LUDO is trained from scratch for each
object. For inference, LUDO uses 40 000 query points. Similar
to LUDO, V2S is a data-driven method. Therefore, we evaluate
the benefit of fine tuning it on our data. For evaluation, we
train LUDO and V2S on 20 000 deformations of each object
for 100 epochs. To compare the approaches, we again use the
centroid error. The test dataset consists of 64 deformations
for each object. Additionally, we discuss the training time,
inference time, and memory requirements.
F . Real-World Robotic Puncturing
In the final set of experiments, we test the overall perfor-
mance of LUDO in a real-world robotic puncturing scenario.
Using deformable silicone phantoms with embedded ROIs,
we task the robot to autonomously puncture the ROI centers.
Each phantom is deformed N = 10 times, examples are
shown in Figure 12. We apply the deformations by pushing
or pulling the phantoms using helping hands. Additionally, we
ensure that all deformations are visually distinguishable from
each-other. After each deformation, each of the three ROIs
is targeted for puncture. These experiments simulate scenarios
such as robotic biopsies and evaluate the practicality of LUDO
on deformed objects for providing structural information to
precisely target internal structures.
VII. RESULTS
A. Inference Time
The number of query points used for inference linearly
increases inference time, but reduces the centroid error, see
0 0.02 0.04
0
0.5
1
1.5
Noise
ROI Center Error [cm]
GC Act.-UWC MCD-UWC SPWC
0 0.02 0.04 0 0.02 0.04
Organ Cylinder Slab
0 0.5 1
0
1
2
3
Dropout
ROI Center Error [cm] 0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1
Fig. 15. The effect of adding noise (as a fraction of the scene size) and
dropping a fraction of points from the input point cloud on the accuracy
of estimating the center of the Regions of Interest (ROIs) is evaluated. Dif-
ferent centroid estimation methods are considered: geometric centroid (GC),
activation-based (Act.-UWC), and Monte-Carlo Dropout (MCD-UWC) based
uncertainty-weighted centroid estimation, and finally softmax probability-
weighted (SPWC) centroid estimation. The vertical line at Dropout = 0.5
indicates the maximum proportion of points randomly dropped during training.
Figure 14. Using 20 000 query points achieves centroid errors
below 2 mm across all objects, with inference times under
20 ms. Increasing the number of points beyond 80 000 yields
only minimal accuracy gains. The most pronounced accuracy
improvement relative to additional inference time occurs when
increasing the point count from 20 000 to 40 000, maintaining
an inference time of less than 30 ms. In comparison to the
other objects, Slab shows slower inference times. This is
caused by the larger number of points in the input point clouds,
resulting in a slower latent distillation. An average input point
cloud for Organ and Cylinder contains 500 points, whereas
Slab can contain over 2000 points, due to the large flat surface
the object.
B. Uncertainty Estimation
We evaluate the effect of MCD on the model performance
by comparing it to models trained without dropout. We found
a dropout of 20% in the MLP part of our architecture to have
only a minimal effect on the centroid error for all objects.
Enabling dropout decreases the accuracy by less than 0.5 mm.
a) Local Per-Point Uncertainty: Using the local per-
point uncertainty and probability values for weighting the
centroid estimation results in the same or even decreased
accuracy.
Figure 15 shows that UWC with activation entropy and
SPWC perform almost identically to the geometric centroid
of a ROI. Using MCD uncertainty values results in a strong
error increase as noise levels increase or more input point are
dropped. The effect of dropping up to 60% of input points has
13
No Noise3% Noise
Input Activation MC Dropout
Mesh-Reconstruction and Uncertainty
Fig. 16. Visualization of a sliced dense output point cloud of the organ
with uncertainty indicated by color. Both activation entropy and Monte-
Carlo Dropout based uncertainty is shown. The uncertainty is visualized
for inputs with and without noise added to the input. The areas around
the decision boundaries have high uncertainty (yellow). Areas far from the
decision boundaries have low uncertainty (purple). Both methods produce very
similar uncertainty values.
no effect on the centroid error. This roughly coincides with the
number of points dropped during training ( 50%). We did not
perform experiments for Slab with noise levels above 0.01 as
the ON fails to consistently reconstruct all ROIs.
The visualization in Figure 16 shows that uncertainty is
high close to the decision boundaries between segments of
the object or between the object and the outside. When
adding noise (noise level0.03) the decision boundaries become
more spread out, indicating LUDO is less confident about
the true location of the decision boundaries. To quantify this
spreading out, we can consider the aggregated uncertainty of
the reconstruction.
b) Aggregated Uncertainty: Both activation entropy and
MCD-based uncertainty values, when aggregated, can be used
to measure a single uncertainty value. Figure 17 shows that,
with an exception for Slab, both approaches provide strictly
monotonically increasing aggregated uncertainty values as
noise or input point drop level increase. The noise level
of 0.01, at which the activation entropy-based aggregated
uncertainty for Slab suddenly drops, coincides with the point
where the ON fails to correctly reconstruct all ROIs.
Additionally, we provide examples of inputs that result in
high aggregated uncertainty values for the Cylinder scene
without added noise and without input point drop, see Fig-
ure 18.
0 0.02 0.040
0.1
0.2
0.3
Noise
Aggr. Uncertainty
Act. MCD
0 0.02 0.04 0 0.02 0.04
Organ Cylinder Slab
0 0.5 10
0.2
0.4
Dropout
Aggr. Uncertainty
0 0.5 1 0 0.5 1
Fig. 17. The aggregated uncertainty is evaluated as noise is added to the input
point cloud (as a fraction of the object size) and as points are dropped from
the input point cloud. The evaluation compares different centroid estimation
methods: Activation-based (Act.) and Monte-Carlo Dropout (MCD) based
uncertainty. The vertical line at Dropout = 0 .5 indicates the maximum
proportion of points that were randomly dropped during training.
AU = 0.052
(a)
AU = 0.067
(b)
AU = 0.100
(c)
Fig. 18. Examples of input point clouds P of the Cylinder with activation-
based Aggregated Uncertainty (AU) outside the range 0.029± 0.014 (mean
± standard deviation). (a) The Cylinder is bent into an inverted U-shape,
leading to ambiguity in labeling the outer Regions of Interest (ROIs). (b)
A point cloud with large missing regions, caused by self-occlusion, but still
capturing both ends. (c) A point cloud containing only the top part of the
Cylinder, with the bottom half not visible at all.
Organ Cylinder Slab
Fig. 19. Examples of explainability point clouds for each scene. The red
regions are areas that have the biggest impact on estimating the deformation
of each object. Highlighted areas include: 1) The bump on the top side of
the organ, which is an important feature to locate the underlying ROI. 2) The
starting and end-points of the Cylinder. 3) The corners from which the Slab
is deformed.
14
TABLE II
MEAN CENTROID ERROR (CM) FOR V2S AND LUDO AFTER 100 EPOCHS
OF TRAINING ACROSS THE THREE DEFORMABLE OBJECTS . T HE
ABBREVIATIONS FO AND FT STAND FOR FULL OBSERVATION AND
FINE -T UNED . LUDO ∗ WAS TRAINED FOR 600 EPOCHS . RIGID
ALIGNMENT REPRESENTS THE CENTROID ERROR OF THE RIGIDLY
ALIGNED DATA GIVEN TO V2S AS INPUT . T HE MEAN ± STANDARD
DEVIATION VALUES ARE COMPUTED OVER 64 DIFFERENT DEFORMATIONS
FOR EACH OBJECT .
Method Organ Cylinder Slab
Rigid Alignment 1.25± 0.80 4 .47± 1.48 2 .43± 0.82
V2S 0.27± 0.17 1 .88± 0.77 1 .39± 0.69
V2S+FO 0.24± 0.16 1 .84± 0.69 0 .99± 0.37
V2S+FT 0.19± 0.13 0 .38± 0.18 0 .51± 0.26
V2S+FT+FO 0.14± 0.08 0 .25± 0.13 0 .37± 0.20
LUDO (Ours) 0.14± 0.05 0 .19± 0.07 0 .19± 0.10
LUDO∗ (Ours) 0.07± 0.03 0 .07± 0.04 0 .12± 0.06
C. Explainability
We qualitatively present explainability point clouds obtained
from each object in Figure 19. LUDO captures features that
are important to understanding the deformations of each de-
formable object. For the Cylinder, the attachment point at the
base and the regions of interaction are clearly highlighted. The
two interaction regions at the tips of the Slab are also clearly
highlighted. For the Organ, the bump at the top is highlighted,
identifying it as a strong feature which also indicates the
position of the embedded middle ROI.
D. Robot Calibration
Our robot calibration procedure described in Section V-E
decreases the mean positioning error from 5.466 mm to
0.956 mm. The maximum error decreases from 8.752 mm
to 2.699 mm. The ablative experiments described in Sec-
tion VI-D have the following impact on the mean positioning
error:
• (∆θ-Only Calibration) : + 1.677 mm,
• (Fixed Tbase): + 0.035 mm,
• (Dynamic Data) : + 0.161 mm, and
• (Single Joint Movement) : + 0.129 mm.
The largest increase in positioning error is a result of
limiting the optimization to only ∆θ. This shows the im-
portance of calibrating the complete set of DH parameters
in contrast to calibrating only the joint zero positions θ.
The low impact of calibrating Tbase indicates a good initial
estimate for the global position of the robot base in relation to
the world reference frame. The use of dynamically collected
data (i.e. using samples (ptracked,q tracked,ξ ) collected during the
movement between end-points) results in a minor decrease in
accuracy. The specific choice of motion to generate the training
data has only minor impact on the total accuracy.
E. Comparison to Baseline
The mean centroid errors of LUDO and V2S are presented
in Table II. After training for 100 epochs, LUDO outperforms
V2S across all three evaluated objects. Further, the centroid
error of LUDO decreases further as more epochs are used
for training. We found that the registration quality of V2S,
pre-trained on the original V2S dataset, plateaus after approx-
imately 70 to 90 epochs, which aligns with the number of
epochs used in the original work. LUDO’s accuracy does not
plateau after 100 epochs, the centroid error is reduced further
through additional epochs. On the smaller training dataset
used for the baseline comparison, LUDO requires between
20 and 40 seconds per training epoch depending on the scene.
V2S requires an average of 14 minutes per epoch. Therefore,
LUDO can be trained between 21 and 42 times faster on the
same hardware. This large difference in training time also
correlates with the raw file size of the training data. An average
LUDO training dataset is approximately 10 gigabytes in size,
whereas the volumetric representation used by V2S results
in training datasets of approximately 160 gigabytes for each
object. For V2S, the training time is in strong contrast to
the inference time. V2S requires only 5 ms whereas LUDO
requires approximately 20 ms.
F . Real-World Robotic Puncturing
For the real-world robotic puncturing we use LUDO with
geometric centroids and 40 000 query points. The success rate
(i.e., hitting the ROIs with the needle) for the Organ and Slab
was 100% for all ROIs. For Cylinder the success rate was
96.67%, with a single failure for the centered ROI. Overall,
we attempted 90 ROI punctures and achieved a success rate of
98.9%. The single failure case is discussed in Section VIII-F.
VIII. DISCUSSION
A. Inference Time
The inference time of LUDO is an important factor, in
particular for real-time applications like robotic surgeries. In
our experiments, we find that using approximately 40 000
query points achieves a good balance between speed and
accuracy, with inference times consistently below 30 ms. This
performance ensures that the system can provide low-latency
feedback necessary for dynamic environments where deforma-
tions can occur rapidly, such as surgical procedures. LUDO
has a constant inference time, regardless of the complexity
of the deformation. The only variables that affects inference
time are the number of points in the observation, see difference
between Slab and Cylinder, as well as the number of points
used to query the occupancy network. Both of these variables
can be adjusted online to ensure a constant inference time. For
example by randomly sub-sampling the point cloud observa-
tion, which LUDO is robust to as shown in Figure 17.
B. Uncertainty Estimation
Both MCD and activation based uncertainty estimation pro-
vide very similar outputs. Contrary to our initial expectations,
we found that using the uncertainty values provided by both
methods for a weighted ROI centroid estimation decreased
accuracy. Especially the use of MCD weighting resulted in a
strong degradation of accuracy. The use of SPWC seems to
also not provide a benefit over using the geometric centroid.
15
Nevertheless, both uncertainty approaches can be used to
estimate a aggregated uncertainty. Intuitively, as the decision
boundaries spread out with increased noise, see Figure 16,
the aggregated uncertainty values increase, see Figure 17. We
found that when LUDO becomes highly uncertain, reaching
a point where it fails to reconstruct ROIs, the activation
entropy-based aggregated uncertainty estimation unexpectedly
exhibits a sudden drop, contrary to the anticipated continuous
increase. Activation entropy-based uncertainty estimation uses
a single forward pass of the model, and cannot distinguish
between confident correct and confident incorrect predictions.
In contrast, MCD-based uncertainty estimation aggregates the
predictions from multiple forward passes. The disagreements
between confident incorrect predictions increase the entropy
of the aggregated prediction. Increased entropy reveals uncer-
tainty even when individual models are confident in their in-
correct predictions. Thus, MCD-based aggregated uncertainty
is better suited for high-risk applications. Nevertheless, the
additional computation cost of MCD-based uncertainty needs
to be taken into account. The inference time increases linearly
with the number m of inferences performed with different
dropout seeds. Finally, the amount of increase in aggregated
uncertainty is scene dependent. Aggregated uncertainty nor-
malization that is object-independent remains an open problem
for future work. We currently use a uniform sampling strategy
to query the neural occupancy function within a bounding
box, which is first fitted to the normalized observation and
then refined to focus on regions likely containing an object.
Consequently, the sampling distribution varies and cannot
be considered independent and identically distributed. For
example, a tighter fitting bounding box, compared to a looser
fitting bounding box, yields fewer sampled points outside the
object. Nonetheless, our aggregated uncertainty provides a
practical indicator for model confidence. If the average entropy
increases ( i.e., boundaries become more diffuse), it signals
lower overall confidence.
Detecting Ambiguities: For strongly deforming objects or
objects with symmetries, estimating structures using single-
view perspectives can become ambiguous. During training, we
found that in instances where the Cylinder forms an upside-
down U (and where the small extrusion at the top is not
visible), LUDO will mix the labels for the outer ROIs. As such
ambiguities can not be resolved without additional knowledge,
it is important to detect ambiguous observations. LUDO can
detect ambiguities through the aggregated uncertainty, which
intuitively increases noticeably with increasing ambiguity, see
Figure 18.
C. Explainability
We found that our masking-based approach results in in-
terpretable results for deformable object understanding. Areas
that provide important information about the object position
or deformations are clearly highlighted. Providing information
on important features can aid in human-robot collaboration
tasks, by providing a human collaborator with reasoning for
autonomous decisions. Potential benefits or interpretation risks
of such explainability visualizations should be investigated in
future work.
D. Robot Calibration
Our calibration routine improved the manufacturer provided
calibration from a mean positioning error of 5.466 mm to
0.956 mm, decreasing the maximum positioning error from
8.752 mm to 2.699 mm. The optimized calibration had a direct
impact on the puncturing task, ensuring that the robot could
hit the target ROI’s center provided by the ON. We found
that without the calibration, the task of accurately puncturing
the ROIs (diameter of 17 mm) was not feasible. Even with
optimal predictions from LUDO, an inaccurate robotic system
could not perform the puncturing task, as it requires precise
execution of the planned trajectory. We performed several
ablations to the calibration routine and found that limiting
the calibration to only ∆θ results in the largest decrease in
accuracy. This indicates that the error is only partially caused
by incorrectly calibrated zero positions of the rotational joints
in the kinematic chain.
E. Comparison to Baseline
In our experiments, LUDO consistently outperforms all con-
figurations of V2S in accurately localizing internal structures
of deformable objects. This is despite V2S being provided with
an optimal rigid alignment, full surface observations, and fine-
tuning. Not only does LUDO achieve lower centroid errors,
but it also trains orders of magnitude faster on the same hard-
ware. This is an important property when considering patient-
specific scenarios. Similarly, the datasets used for LUDO are
also orders of magnitude smaller. This is due to the memory-
inefficient 3D volumetric representations used by V2S.
Despite the benefits of LUDO, the baseline method V2S has
advantages. Its conditioning approach, which also uses a volu-
metric representation of the prior model as input, allows V2S
to register new deformable objects that are similarly shaped to
those seen during training. When tested on the Organ object,
V2S achieves a centroid localization error of 0.27± 0.17 cm
(mean± standard deviation) without additional fine-tuning,
likely because the Organ has a shape similar to objects in
V2S’s original training data. By contrast, LUDO is specialized
to the single prior model used during training. Moreover,
V2S offers a low inference time of around 5 ms, compared
to about 20 ms with LUDO. We want to highlight that this
time measurement assumes an optimal initial registration has
been found for V2S and all observations are already converted
to a volumetric representation.
F . Real-World Robotic Puncturing
Our approach achieved a near-perfect success rate, with
100% accuracy on two of the phantoms and 96.67% on the
third. The system effectively handled various strong defor-
mation states. The single failure was due to needle bending,
likely caused by friction between the needle and the silicone
phantom material, see Figure 20. To address friction-based
failure cases in a phantom setup, better entry angles or material
choices should be considered. Online replanning could also
compensate for deformations during execution and will be
explored in future work. Overall, the experiments confirmed
16
Bent Needle
Intended Trajectory
Target ROI
Fig. 20. Failure case during robotic execution in the Cylinder scene. The
Region of Interest (ROI) was missed by the robotically controlled needle.
The high friction inside of the silicone phantom caused the needle to bend
and miss the ROI. The Intended Trajectory is shown as a dashed line.
that the proposed method is effective for autonomous robotic
puncturing.
G. Limitations
Our approach has multiple limitations that will be addressed
in future work. Trajectory Updates: We do not use live
updates of the reconstruction during the puncturing process.
But due to the deformable nature of our phantoms, there
are noticeable deformations that occur during puncturing. For
future applications, updating the trajectory to account for
these deformations will be crucial to increase the accuracy
and safety. Interaction Points: Our approach requires the
generation of training data using a FEM simulation. Although
the simulation is physically realistic, we believe a pipeline
that does not require the definition of interaction points will
be vital for future work. Single-Patch Explainability: Our
current masking-based explainability method only addresses
ambiguities coming from the removal of a single circular
patch. As a simplified example, consider a rigid cylinder of
known length L and fixed radius. If the top of the cylinder is
masked in the observation, the visible bottom and side allow
inference of the full 3D pose, asL determines the missing top’s
location. However, if both the top and bottom are masked, the
visible side alone cannot resolve the cylinder’s position along
its length. It could be shifted up or down while still matching
the visible data. Addressing such interdependencies is left
for future work. Per-ROI Explainability: LUDO reconstructs
the entire deformable object, including its internal structures,
leading to entangled input contributions across segments. We
can provide per-ROI explainability by computing the Si only
for the respective class and omitting the other classes. Still, the
explanation remains influenced by the holistic reconstruction.
A more targeted approach, where the network is trained
to reconstruct only the ROI given the observation, could
improve the interpretability of per-segment input contributions.
This approach comes with the limitation that the structural
information for the encompassing object is not available for
trajectory planning. Disentangling explanations for multi-part
object reconstruction remains an open task for future work.
Normalization of Aggregated Uncertainty: The aggregated
uncertainty values depend on the object, making it unfeasible
to establish a single overall uncertainty threshold for determin-
ing when the output is unsafe for use. An additional neural
network could be used to learn a scene-specific uncertainty
normalization. Additionally, strategies should be explored to
ensure that no bias is introduced due to the query point
sampling strategy. Safety: We wish to emphasize that although
LUDO provides explainability and uncertainty estimates, we
do not evaluate the overall safety of LUDO. Background
Segmentation: Our approach requires the input point cloud
to contain only the deformable object of interest. Therefore,
a segmentation of the point cloud is needed. As many depth
sensors also provide an RGB image, machine learning-based
image segmentation approaches should be investigated for
background segmentation in future work. Depth Camera: The
physical dimensions of our depth sensor constrain its practical
use in surgical settings. In minimally invasive surgery, a
more compact depth sensor would be necessary. Additionally,
the Zivid One+ M achieves high-precision depth estimations
through structured light projection. However, projecting struc-
tured patterns onto an intraoperative scene could interfere with
the surgical workflow. Consequently, the quality of the point
cloud observations in our evaluation is likely superior to what
can be obtained in real surgical environments, where stereo-
based microscopic or endoscopic systems are more commonly
used. Nevertheless, we currently observe a fast development of
accurate machine learning-based monocular and stereo depth
estimation methods. Such approaches are quickly becoming
competitive and should be considered in future work. Small
Segments: As we use dense output point clouds to determine
target positions, interacting with very small object segments
can be challenging, as they are less likely to be queried using
random query points. An approach that better queries areas
where structures are likely to be, such as multi-staged hier-
archical querying, could improve the inference of very small
structures. Controlled Environment: The experimental setup
involved a controlled environment, primarily due to precision
requirements of the robotic system. The camera and robot are
rigidly mounted to the table to ensure accurate positioning,
and the organ phantoms are secured to prevent movement
during puncturing. This setup does not fully capture real-
world conditions with complex backgrounds and soft tissue
that moves during puncturing. Addressing these constraints in
a dynamic setting will require online re-planning and a robust
background segmentation.
IX. CONCLUSION
This work introduces LUDO, a method for reconstructing
and targeting internal structures of deformable objects for
robotic applications. LUDO uses neural occupancy networks
to infer the full state of deformable objects and their internal
structures. The fast inference times of below 30 ms make
this approach highly applicable in interactive real-world ap-
plications. In contrast to previous approaches for deformable
17
object reconstruction, we generate our training data using
SOFA, a state-of-the-art FEM simulation framework. We in-
vestigate methods and give experimental insights into local
and aggregated uncertainty estimation for occupancy learning.
Additionally, we introduce a masking based explainability ap-
proach for 3D reconstructions from point clouds. We validate
our approach in robotic real-world experiments, where we
puncture ROIs in three deformable objects with a total success
rate of 98.9%. One notable failure case, where the robotic
needle missed the ROI due to bending, emphasizes the im-
portance of low-latency trajectory updates during deformable
object interactions. Such updates will be the focus of future
investigations to extend the approach for applications requir-
ing online trajectory replanning. We demonstrated LUDO’s
advantages compared to V2S, despite providing the baseline
with numerous advantages during the evaluation. LUDO is an
important step towards practical and safe robotic interaction
with deformable objects, as it not only provides rapid struc-
tural information, including internal structures hidden from
visual observation, but also introduces preliminary methods
for quantifying its own uncertainty. LUDO eliminates the need
for traditional registration methods and sets a new foundation
for future developments in autonomous manipulation of de-
formable objects.
REFERENCES
[1] P. J. Besl and N. D. McKay, “Method for registration of 3-d shapes,”
in Sensor fusion IV: control paradigms and data structures , vol. 1611.
Spie, 1992, pp. 586–606.
[2] M. Pfeiffer, C. Riediger, J. Weitz, and S. Speidel, “Learning soft tissue
behavior of organs for surgical navigation with convolutional neural
networks,” International journal of computer assisted radiology and
surgery, vol. 14, pp. 1147–1155, 2019.
[3] M. Pfeiffer, et al. , “Non-rigid volume to surface registration using
a data-driven biomechanical model,” in Medical Image Computing
and Computer Assisted Intervention–MICCAI 2020: 23rd International
Conference, Lima, Peru, October 4–8, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 23 .
Springer, 2020, pp. 724–734.
[4] M. Jia and M. Kyan, “Improving intraoperative liver registration in
image-guided surgery with learning-based reconstruction,” in ICASSP
2021 - 2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and
Signal Processing (ICASSP) , Jun 2021, p. 1230–1234.
[5] B. Deng, Y . Yao, R. M. Dyke, and J. Zhang, “A survey of non-rigid
3d registration,” in Computer Graphics F orum, vol. 41, no. 2. Wiley
Online Library, 2022, pp. 559–589.
[6] P. Henrich, B. Gyenes, P. M. Scheikl, G. Neumann, and F. Mathis-
Ullrich, “Registered and segmented deformable object reconstruction
from a single view point cloud,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter
Conference on Applications of Computer Vision , 2024, pp. 3129–3138.
[7] P. Henrich, et al. , “Tracking tumors under deformation from partial
point clouds using occupancy networks,” 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02619
[8] M. Afshar, et al. , “A Model-Based Multi-Point Tissue Manipulation
for Enhancing Breast Brachytherapy,” IEEE Transactions on Medical
Robotics and Bionics , vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 1046–1056, Nov. 2022.
[9] F. Alambeigi, Z. Wang, Y .-h. Liu, R. H. Taylor, and M. Armand,
“Toward Semi-autonomous Cryoablation of Kidney Tumors via Model-
Independent Deformable Tissue Manipulation Technique,” Annals of
Biomedical Engineering , vol. 46, no. 10, pp. 1650–1662, Oct. 2018.
[10] F. Zhong, Y . Wang, Z. Wang, and Y .-H. Liu, “Dual-Arm Robotic Needle
Insertion With Active Tissue Deformation for Autonomous Suturing,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2669–2676,
July 2019.
[11] P. R. Florence, L. Manuelli, and R. Tedrake, “Dense object nets: Learn-
ing dense visual object descriptors by and for robotic manipulation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08756 , 2018.
[12] B. Thach, B. Y . Cho, A. Kuntz, and T. Hermans, “Learning Visual
Shape Control of Novel 3D Deformable Objects from Partial-View Point
Clouds,” in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), May 2022, pp. 8274–8281.
[13] Y . Ou and M. Tavakoli, “Sim-to-Real Surgical Robot Learning and
Autonomous Planning for Internal Tissue Points Manipulation Using
Reinforcement Learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8,
no. 5, pp. 2502–2509, May 2023.
[14] P. M. Scheikl, et al. , “Movement primitive diffusion: Learning gentle
robotic manipulation of deformable objects,” IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters , vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5338–5345, 2024.
[15] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical
feature learning on point sets in a metric space,” Advances in neural
information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017.
[16] L. Mescheder, M. Oechsle, M. Niemeyer, S. Nowozin, and A. Geiger,
“Occupancy networks: Learning 3d reconstruction in function space,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 4460–4470.
[17] J. J. Park, P. Florence, J. Straub, R. Newcombe, and S. Lovegrove,
“Deepsdf: Learning continuous signed distance functions for shape rep-
resentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , 2019, pp. 165–174.
[18] N. Rahaman, et al. , “On the spectral bias of neural networks,” in
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning ,
ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, K. Chaudhuri
and R. Salakhutdinov, Eds., vol. 97. PMLR, 09–15 Jun 2019,
pp. 5301–5310. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/
rahaman19a.html
[19] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” in ECCV, 2020.
[20] P. Henrich and F. Mathis-Ullrich, “Looc: Localizing organs using
occupancy networks and body surface depth images,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.12407, 2024.
[21] F. Faure, et al., “SOFA: A multi-model framework for interactive phys-
ical simulation,” in Soft Tissue Biomechanical Modeling for Computer
Assisted Surgery, 2012, vol. 11, pp. 283–321.
[22] S. Tian, B. G. Cangan, S. E. Navarro, A. Beger, C. Duriez, and
R. K. Katzschmann, “Multi-tap resistive sensing and fem modeling
enables shape and force estimation in soft robots,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 2830–2837, 2024.
[23] J. Lai, T.-A. Ren, W. Yue, S. Su, J. Y . Chan, and H. Ren, “Sim-to-real
transfer of soft robotic navigation strategies that learns from the virtual
eye-in-hand vision,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , 2023.
[24] F. Makiyeh, F. Chaumette, M. Marchal, and A. Krupa, “Shape servoing
of a soft object using fourier series and a physics-based model,” in 2023
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2023, pp. 6356–6363.
[25] P. M. Scheikl, et al. , “Sim-to-Real Transfer for Visual Reinforce-
ment Learning of Deformable Object Manipulation for Robot-Assisted
Surgery,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 560–
567, Feb. 2023.
[26] Y . Gal and Z. Ghahramani, “Dropout as a bayesian approximation:
Representing model uncertainty in deep learning,” in Proceedings
of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, M. F. Balcan and
K. Q. Weinberger, Eds., vol. 48. New York, New York, USA:
PMLR, 20–22 Jun 2016, pp. 1050–1059. [Online]. Available:
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/gal16.html
[27] A. Kendall and Y . Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in bayesian
deep learning for computer vision?” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[28] L. M. Zintgraf, T. S. Cohen, T. Adel, and M. Welling, “Visualizing deep
neural network decisions: Prediction difference analysis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.04595, 2017.
[29] R. C. Fong and A. Vedaldi, “Interpretable explanations of black boxes
by meaningful perturbation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 3429–3437.
[30] R. R. Selvaraju, M. Cogswell, A. Das, R. Vedantam, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via
gradient-based localization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision , 2017, pp. 618–626.
[31] J. Denavit and R. S. Hartenberg, “A kinematic notation for lower-pair
mechanisms based on matrices,” 1955.
[32] D. Q. Huynh, “Metrics for 3d rotations: Comparison and analysis,”
Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision , vol. 35, pp. 155–164,
2009.
18
[33] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , San
Diega, CA, USA, 2015.
